--- Page 20 ---
Foreword 
Little more than 10 years ago, security was barely a newborn in diapers.
With only a handful of security professionals in 1994, few practiced secu-
rity and even fewer truly understood it. Security technologies amounted tolittle more than anti-virus software and packet filtering routers at that time.And the concept of a “hacker” came primarily from the Hollywood movie “WarGames”; or more often it referred to someone with a low golf score. As a result,just like Rodney Dangerfield it got “no respect” and no one took it seriously.IT professionals saw it largely as a nuisance, to be ignored — that is untilthey were impacted by it.
Today, the number of Certified Information Systems Security Professionals
(CISSP) have topped 23,000 (www.isc2.org) worldwide, and there are moresecurity companies dotting the landscape than anyone could possibly remem-ber. Today security technologies encompass everything from authenticationand authorization, to firewalls and VPNs. There are so many ways to addressthe security problem that it can cause more than a slight migraine simply con-sidering the alternatives. And the term “hacker” has become a permanent partof our everyday vernacular — as defined in nearly daily headlines. The world(and its criminals) has changed dramatically.
So what does all this mean for you, the home/end user or IT/security profes-
sional that is thrust into this dangerous online world every time you hit thepower button on your computer? The answer is “everything”. The digitallandscape is peppered with land mines that can go off with the slightesttouch or, better yet, without any provocation whatsoever. Consider somesimple scenarios: 
/H12012Simply plugging into the Internet without a properly configured firewallcan get you hacked before the pizza is delivered, within 30 minutes or less.
/H12012Opening an email attachment from a family member, friend, or work col-league can install a backdoor on your system allowing a hacker freeaccess to your computer. 
/H12012Downloading and executing a file via your Internet Messaging (IM) pro-gram can turn your pristine desktop into a Centers for Disease Control(CDC) hotzone, complete with the latest alphabet soup virus. 
/H12012Browsing to an innocent (and trusted) website can completely compro-mise your computer, allowing a hacker to read your sensitive files orworse delete them. 01 55784X FM.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page xvii
--- Page 21 ---
Trust me when we say the likelihood of becoming an Internet drive-by statistic
on the information superhighway is painfully real. 
I am often asked, “Is the fear, uncertainty, and doubt (FUD) centered on cybert-
errorism justified? Can cyber-terrorists really affect our computer systems
and our public infrastructure as some have prognosticated like new ageNostradamus soothsayers? The answer I always give is “Unequivocally, yes”.The possibility of a digital Pearl Harbor is closer than many think. Organizedterrorist cells like Al Qaeda are raided almost weekly, and when computers arediscovered, their drives are filled with cyber hacking plans, U.S. infrastructureblueprints, and instructions on attacking U.S. computer and infrastructuretargets. 
Do you believe the energy commissions report about the biggest power outage
in U.S history? The one that on August 14, 2003 left 1/5
thof the U.S. population
without power (about 50 million people) for over 12 hours? Do you believe thatit has to do with untrimmed trees and faulty control processes? If you believein Occam’s Razor, then yes, the simplest explanation is usually the correct onebut remember this: the power outage hit just three days after the MicrosoftBlaster worm, one of the most vicious computer worms ever unleashed onthe Internet, first hit. Coincidence? Perhaps.
Some of you may be skeptical, saying “Well, if the threat is so real, why hasn’t
something bad happened yet?” I respond simply, “If I had come to you onSept. 10, 2001, and said that in the near future people would use commercialairplanes as bombs to kill over 3,000 people in the matter of 5 hours, wouldyou believe me?” I understand your skepticism. And you should be skeptical.But we are asking for your trust, and your faith, before something bad happens.Trust that we know the truth, we know what is possible, and we know themind of the enemy. I think we can all agree on at least one thing, we cannotallow them to succeed.
Every minute of every day there are governments, organized crime, and hacker
groups turning the doors on your house looking for an unlocked entry. Theyare rattling the windows and circling your domicile, looking for a weakness, avulnerability, or a way into your house. Are you going to let them in? Are yougoing to sit idly by and watch as they ransack your belongings, make use ofyour facilities, and desecrate your sanctuary? Or are you going to empoweryourself, educate yourself, and prevent them from winning? The actions youtake today will ultimately answer that question.
Do not despair, all hope is not lost. Increasing security is more of a mindset
than anything else. Security is akin to working out. If you don’t do it regularly,it won’t become a part of your lifestyle. And if it doesn’t become a part of yourlifestyle, it will quickly become something you can forego and avoid. In otherwords, you won’t be fit. Same thing applies for security. If you don’t realize thatit is a process, not a goal, then you will never make it part of your everydaywellness routine, as a result it quickly becomes something you forego andavoid. And if you avoid it, you will eventually be bit by it.Hacking For Dummies xviii01 55784X FM.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page xviii
--- Page 22 ---
The greatest gift you can give yourself is that of education. What you don’t
know may not kill you but it may seriously impact you or someone you careabout. Knowing what you don’t know is the real trick. And filling in the gapsof knowledge is paramount to preventing a significant attack.  Hacking For
Dummies can fill in those gaps. Kevin has done a remarkable job in presenting
material that is valuable and unique in that it covers  hacking methodologiesfor Windows, Novell, and Linux, as well as such little covered topics as physi-cal security, social engineering, and malware. The varied coverage of securitytopics in this book is what helps you more completely understand the mindof the hacker and how they work; and it will ultimately be the singular reasonyou may avoid an attack in the future. Read it carefully. Learn from it. Andpractice what it says in every area you can.
Make no mistake; the digital battlefield is very real. It has no beginning, it has
no ending, it has no boundaries, and it has no rules. Read this book, learnfrom it and defend yourself or we may lose this digital war.
Stuart McClure is a world-renowned information security expert, founder and co-
author of the highly-popular Hacking Exposed series of books, and founder andPresident and Chief Technology Officer of Foundstone, Inc., experts in strategicsecurity. He can be reached at stu@foundstone.com.xix Foreword01 55784X FM.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page xix
--- Page 23 ---
Hacking For Dummies xx01 55784X FM.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page xx
--- Page 24 ---
Introduction
Welcome to Hacking For Dummies. This book outlines computer hacker
tricks and techniques — in plain English — to assess the security of
your own information systems, find security vulnerabilities, and fix the vul-
nerabilities before malicious and criminal hackers have an opportunity totake advantage of them. This hacking is the professional, aboveboard, andlegal type of security testing — which I call ethical hacking throughout the
book .Computer and network security is a complex subject and an ever-
moving target. You must stay on top of it to ensure your information is pro-tected from the bad guys.
You can implement all the security technologies and other best practices
possible, and your information systems may be secure — as far as you know.However, until you understand how hackers think and apply that knowledgeto assess your systems from a hacker’s-eye view, you can’t get a true sense ofhow secure your information really is.
Ethical hacking — sometimes referred to as penetration testing or white-hat
hacking — is a necessary requirement to ensure that information systems are
truly secure on an ongoing basis. This book provides you with the knowledge
required to successfully implement an ethical hacking program, along withcountermeasures that you can implement to keep malicious hackers out ofyour business.
Who Should Read This Book?
If you want to hack other people’s computer systems maliciously, this book isnot for you.
Disclaimer: If you choose to use the information in this book to hack or break
into computer systems maliciously in an unauthorized fashion, you’re on your
own. Neither I, as the author, nor anyone else associated with this book shall
be liable or responsible for any unethical or criminal choices that you maymake and execute using the methodologies and tools that I describe. Thisbook is intended solely for the IT professional to test information security inan authorized fashion.02 55784x intro.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 1
--- Page 25 ---
Okay, now that that’s out of the way, time for the good stuff! This book is for
you if you’re a network administrator, information-security manager, securityconsultant, or someone interested in finding out more about legally and ethi-cally hacking your own or a customer’s information systems to make themmore secure.
As the ethical hacker performing well-intended information-security assess-
ments, you can detect and point out security holes that may otherwise beoverlooked. If you’re performing these tests on your own systems, the infor-mation you uncover in your tests can help you win over management andprove that information security should be taken seriously. Likewise, if you’reperforming these tests for your customers, you can help find security holesthat can be plugged before malicious hackers have a chance to exploit them.
The information in this book helps you stay on top of the security game and
enjoy the fame and glory that comes with helping your organization and cus-tomers prevent bad things from happening to their information.
About This Book
Hacking For Dummies is a reference guide on hacking computers and network
systems. The ethical hacking techniques are based on the unwritten rules ofcomputer system penetration testing and information-security best practices.This book covers everything from establishing your hacking plan to testingyour systems to managing an ongoing ethical hacking program. Realistically,for many networks, operating systems, and applications, thousands of possi-ble hacks exist. I cover the major ones that you should be concerned about.Whether you need to assess security vulnerabilities on a small home-officenetwork, a medium-size corporate network, or across large enterprise sys-tems, Hacking For Dummies provides the information you need.
How to Use This Book
This book includes the following features:
/H12012Various technical and nontechnical hack attacks and their detailedmethodologies
/H12012Hack-attack case studies from well-known and anonymous hackers andother security experts
/H12012Specific countermeasures to protect against hack attacks
Each chapter is an individual reference on a specific ethical hacking subject.You can refer to individual chapters that pertain to the type of systems you’re
assessing, or you can read the book straight through. 2 Hacking For Dummies 02 55784x intro.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 2
--- Page 26 ---
Before you start hacking your systems, familiarize yourself with the informa-
tion in Part I so you’re prepared for the tasks at hand. The adage “if you failto plan, you plan to fail” rings true for the ethical hacking process. You mustget written permission and have a solid game plan.
This material is not intended to be used for unethical or illegal hacking pur-
poses to propel you from script kiddie to mega hacker. Rather, it is designedto provide you with the knowledge you need to hack your own or your cus-tomers’ systems — in an ethical and legal manner — to enhance the securityof the information involved.
What You Don’t Need to Read
Depending on your computer and network configurations, you may be able toskip chapters. For example, if you aren’t running Linux or wireless networks,you can skip those chapters.
Foolish Assumptions
I make a few assumptions about you, aspiring information-security person:
/H12012You’re familiar with basic computer-, network-, and information-security-related concepts and terms.
/H12012You have a basic understanding of what hackers do.
/H12012You have access to a computer and a network on which to test thesetechniques.
/H12012You have access to the Internet in order to obtain the various tools usedin the ethical hacking process.
/H12012You have permission to perform the hacking techniques in this book.
How This Book Is Organized
This book is organized into eight parts — six regular chapter parts, a Part ofTens, and a part with appendixes. These parts are modular, so you can jumparound from one part to another as needed. Each chapter provides practicalmethodologies and best practices you can utilize as part of your ethical hack-ing efforts, including checklists and references to specific tools you can use,as well as resources on the Internet.3 Introduction02 55784x intro.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 3
--- Page 27 ---
Part I: Building the Foundation
for Ethical Hacking
This part covers the fundamental aspects of ethical hacking. It starts with an
overview of the value of ethical hacking and what you should and shouldn’tdo during the process. You get inside the hacker’s mindset and discover howto plan your ethical hacking efforts. This part covers the steps involved inthe ethical hacking process, including how to choose the proper tools.
Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion
This part gets you rolling with the ethical hacking process. It covers severalwell-known hack attacks, including social engineering and cracking pass-words, to get your feet wet. The techniques presented are some of the mostwidely used hack attacks. This part covers the human and physical elementsof security, which tend to be the weakest links in any information-securityprogram. After you plunge into these topics, you’ll know the tips and tricksrequired to perform common general hack attacks against your systems, aswell as specific countermeasures to keep your information systems secure.
Part III: Network Hacking
Starting with the larger network in mind, this part covers methods to testyour systems for various well-known network infrastructure vulnerabilities.From weaknesses in the TCP/IP protocol suite to wireless network insecuri-ties, you find out how networks are compromised using specific methods offlawed network communications, along with various countermeasures thatyou can implement to keep from becoming a victim. This part also includescase studies on some of the network hack attacks that are presented.
Part IV: Operating System Hacking
Practically all operating systems have well-known vulnerabilities that hackersoften use. This part jumps into hacking three widely used operating systems:Windows, Linux, and NetWare. The hacking methods include scanning youroperating systems for vulnerabilities and enumerating the specific hosts togain detailed information. This part also includes information on exploitingwell-known vulnerabilities in these operating systems, taking over operatingsystems remotely, and specific countermeasures that you can implement tomake your operating systems more secure. This part also includes case stud-ies on operating-system hack attacks.4 Hacking For Dummies 02 55784x intro.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 4
--- Page 28 ---
Part V: Application Hacking
Application security is gaining more visibility in the information-security arena
these days. An increasing number of attacks are aimed directly at variousapplications, which are often able to bypass firewalls, intrusion-detectionsystems, and antivirus software. This part discusses hacking specific appli-cations, including coverage on malicious software and messaging systems,along with practical countermeasures that you can put in place to make yourapplications more secure. 
One of the most common network attacks is on Web applications. Practically
every firewall lets Web traffic into and out of the network, so most attacks areagainst the millions of Web applications available to almost anyone. This partcovers Web application hack attacks, countermeasures, and some applicationhacking case studies for real-world security testing scenarios.
Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath
After you’ve performed your ethical hack attacks, what do you do with theinformation you’ve gathered? Shelve it? Show it off? How do you move for-ward? This part answers all these questions and more. From developingreports for upper management to remediating the security flaws that you dis-cover to establishing procedures for your ongoing ethical hacking efforts,this part brings the ethical hacking process full circle. This information notonly ensures that your effort and time are well spent, but also is evidencethat information security is as an essential element for success in any busi-ness that depends on computers and information technology.
Part VII: The Part of Tens
This part contains tips to help ensure the success of your ethical hackingprogram. You find out how to get upper management to buy into your ethicalhacking program so you can get going and start protecting your systems. Thispart also includes the top ten ethical hacking mistakes to avoid and my topten tips for ethical hacking success. 
Part VIII: Appendixes
This part includes two appendixes that cover ethical hacking reference mate-rials. This includes a one-stop reference listing of ethical hacking tools andresources, as well as information on the Hacking For Dummies Web site.5 Introduction02 55784x intro.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 5
--- Page 29 ---
Icons Used in This Book
This icon points out technical information that is interesting but not vital to
your understanding of the topic being discussed.
This icon points out information that is worth committing to memory.This icon points out information that could have a negative impact on your
ethical hacking efforts — so please read it!
This icon refers to advice that can help highlight or clarify an important
point.
Where to Go from Here
The more you know about how hackers work and how your systems shouldbe tested, the better you’re able to secure your computer systems. This bookprovides the foundation that you need to develop and maintain a successfulethical-hacking program for your organization and customers. Keep in mindthat the high-level concepts of ethical hacking won’t change as often as thespecific information-security vulnerabilities you’re protecting against. The artand science of ethical hacking will always remain an art and a science — anda field that’s ever-changing. You must keep up with the latest hardware andsoftware technologies, along with the various vulnerabilities that come aboutyear after year. No one best way to hack your systems ethically exists, sotweak this information to your heart’s content. Happy (ethical) hacking!6 Hacking For Dummies 02 55784x intro.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 6
--- Page 30 ---
Part I
Building the
Foundation for
Ethical Hacking03 55784X PP01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 7
--- Page 31 ---
In this part . . .Your mission — should you choose to accept it — is to
find the holes in your network before the bad guys do.
This mission will be fun, educational, and most likely enter-taining. It will certainly be an eye-opening experience. The
cool part is that you can emerge as the hero, knowing thatyour company will be better protected against hackerattacks and less likely to have its name smeared acrossthe headlines at any time.
If you’re new to ethical hacking, this is the place to begin.
The chapters in this part will get you started with informa-tion on what to do and how to do it when you’re hackingyour own systems. Oh, and also, you ﬁnd out what notto
do as well. This information will guide you through buildingthe foundation for your ethical hacking program to makesure you’re going down the right path so you don’t veeroff and end up going down a one-way dead-end street.03 55784X PP01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 8
--- Page 32 ---
Chapter 1
Introduction to Ethical Hacking
In This Chapter
/H17075Understanding hacker objectives
/H17075Outlining the differences between ethical hackers and malicious hackers
/H17075Examining how the ethical hacking process has come about
/H17075Understanding the dangers that your computer systems face
/H17075Starting the ethical hacking process
This book is about hacking ethically — the science of testing your comput-
ers and network for security vulnerabilities and plugging the holes you
find before the bad guys get a chance to exploit them.
Although ethical is an often overused and misunderstood word, the Merriam-
Webster dictionary defines ethical perfectly for the context of this book and
the professional security testing techniques that I cover — that is, conforming
to accepted professional standards of conduct . IT practitioners are obligated to
perform all the tests covered in this book aboveboard and only after permis-
sion has been obtained by the owner(s) of the systems — hence the dis claimer
in the introduction.
How Hackers Beget Ethical Hackers
We’ve all heard of hackers. Many of us have even suffered the consequencesof hacker actions. So who are these hackers? Why is it important to knowabout them? The next few sections give you the lowdown on hackers.
Defining hacker
Hacker is a word that has two meanings:
/H12012Traditionally, a hacker is someone who likes to tinker with software orelectronic systems. Hackers enjoy exploring and learning how computersystems operate. They love discovering new ways to work electronically.04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 9
--- Page 33 ---
/H12012Recently, hacker has taken on a new meaning — someone who mali ciously
breaks into systems for personal gain. Technically, these criminals are
crackers (criminal hackers). Crackers break into (crack) systems with
malicious intent. They are out for personal gain: fame, profit, and evenrevenge. They modify, delete, and steal critical information, often makingother people miserable.
The good-guy (white-hat) hackers don’t like being in the same category as the
bad-guy (black-hat) hackers. (These terms come from Western movies where
the good guys wore white cowboy hats and the bad guys wore black cowboyhats.) Whatever the case, most people give hacker a negative connotation.
Many malicious hackers claim that they don’t cause damage but instead arealtruistically helping others. Yeah, right. Many malicious hackers are elec-tronic thieves.
In this book, I use the following terminology:
/H12012Hackers (or bad guys ) try to compromise computers .
/H12012Ethical hackers (or good guys ) protect computers against illicit entry .
Hackers go for almost any system they think they can compromise. Some
prefer prestigious, well-protected systems, but hacking into anyone’s systemincreases their status in hacker circles.
Ethical Hacking 101
You need protection from hacker shenanigans. An ethical hacker possesses
the skills, mindset, and tools of a hacker but is also trustworthy. Ethical hack-ers perform the hacks as security tests for their systems.
If you perform ethical hacking tests for customers or simply want to add
another certification to your credentials, you may want to consider the ethi-cal hacker certification Certified Ethical Hacker, which is sponsored by EC-Council. See 
www.eccouncil.org/CEH.htm for more information.
Ethical hacking — also known as penetration testing or white-hat hacking —
involves the same tools, tricks, and techniques that hackers use, but with onemajor difference: Ethical hacking is legal. Ethical hacking is performed withthe target’s permission. The intent of ethical hacking is to discover vulnera-bilities from a hacker’s viewpoint so systems can be better secured. It’s partof an overall information risk management program that allows for ongoingsecurity improvements. Ethical hacking can also ensure that vendors’ claimsabout the security of their products are legitimate.10 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 10
--- Page 34 ---
To hack your own systems like the bad guys, you must think like they think.
It’s absolutely critical to know your enemy; see Chapter 2 for details.
Understanding the Need to
Hack Your Own Systems
To catch a thief, think like a thief. That’s the basis for ethical hacking.
The law of averages works against security. With the increased numbers and
expanding knowledge of hackers combined with the growing number of systemvulnerabilities and other unknowns, the time will come when all computersystems are hacked or compromised in some way. Protecting your systemsfrom the bad guys — and not just the generic vulnerabilities that everyoneknows about — is absolutely critical. When you know hacker tricks, you cansee how vulnerable your systems are.
Hacking preys on weak security practices and undisclosed vulnerabilities.
Firewalls, encryption, and virtual private networks (VPNs) can create a falsefeeling of safety. These security systems often focus on high-level vulnerabili-ties, such as viruses and traffic through a firewall, without affecting how hack-ers work. Attacking your own systems to discover vulnerabilities is a step tomaking them more secure. This is the only proven method of greatly hardeningyour systems from attack. If you don’t identify weaknesses, it’s a matter oftime before the vulnerabilities are exploited.
As hackers expand their knowledge, so should you. You must think like them
to protect your systems from them. You, as the ethical hacker, must knowactivities hackers carry out and how to stop their efforts. You should knowwhat to look for and how to use that information to thwart hackers’ efforts.
You don’t have to protect your systems from everything. You can’t. The only
protection against everything is to unplug your computer systems and lockthem away so no one can touch them — not even you. That’s not the bestapproach to information security. What’s important is to protect your sys-tems from known vulnerabilities and common hacker attacks.
It’s impossible to buttress all possible vulnerabilities on all your systems. You
can’t plan for all possible attacks — especially the ones that are currentlyunknown. However, the more combinations you try — the more you test wholesystems instead of individual units — the better your chances of discoveringvulnerabilities that affect everything as a whole.
Don’t take ethical hacking too far, though. It makes little sense to harden your
systems from unlikely attacks. For instance, if you don’t have a lot of foot traffic11 Chapter 1: Introduction to Ethical Hacking04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 11
--- Page 35 ---
in your office and no internal Web server running, you may not have as much
to worry about as an Internet hosting provider would have. However, don’tforget about insider threats from malicious employees!
Your overall goals as an ethical hacker should be as follows:
/H12012Hack your systems in a nondestructive fashion.
/H12012Enumerate vulnerabilities and, if necessary, prove to upper management
that vulnerabilities exist.
/H12012Apply results to remove vulnerabilities and better secure your systems.
Understanding the Dangers
Your Systems Face
It’s one thing to know that your systems generally are under fire from hackers
around the world. It’s another to understand specific attacks against your sys-tems that are possible. This section offers some well-known attacks but is byno means a comprehensive listing. That requires its own book: Hack Attacks
Encyclopedia, by John Chirillo (Wiley Publishing, Inc.) .
Many information-security vulnerabilities aren’t critical by themselves.However, exploiting several vulnerabilities at the same time can take its toll.For example, a default Windows OS configuration, a weak SQL Server admin-istrator password, and a server hosted on a wireless network may not bemajor security concerns separately. But exploiting all three of these vulnera-bilities at the same time can be a serious issue.
Nontechnical attacks
Exploits that involve manipulating people — end users and even yourself —are the greatest vulnerability within any computer or network infrastructure.Humans are trusting by nature, which can lead to social-engineering exploits.Social engineering is defined as the exploitation of the trusting nature of human
beings to gain information for malicious purposes. I cover social engineeringin depth in Chapter 5.
Other common and effective attacks against information systems are physical.
Hackers break into buildings, computer rooms, or other areas containing crit-ical information or property. Physical attacks can include dumpster diving
(rummaging through trash cans and dumpsters for intellectual property,passwords, network diagrams, and other information).12 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 12
--- Page 36 ---
Network-infrastructure attacks
Hacker attacks against network infrastructures can be easy, because many
networks can be reached from anywhere in the world via the Internet. Hereare some examples of network-infrastructure attacks:
/H12012Connecting into a network through a rogue modem attached to acomputer behind a firewall
/H12012Exploiting weaknesses in network transport mechanisms, such as TCP/IPand NetBIOS
/H12012Flooding a network with too many requests, creating a denial of service(DoS) for legitimate requests
/H12012Installing a network analyzer on a network and capturing every packetthat travels across it, revealing confidential information in clear text
/H12012Piggybacking onto a network through an insecure 802.11b wirelessconfiguration
Operating-system attacks
Hacking operating systems (OSs) is a preferred method of the bad guys. OSscomprise a large portion of hacker attacks simply because every computerhas one and so many well-known exploits can be used against them.
Occasionally, some operating systems that are more secure out of the box —
such as Novell NetWare and the flavors of BSD UNIX — are attacked, andvulnerabilities turn up. But hackers prefer attacking operating systems likeWindows and Linux because they are widely used and better known for theirvulnerabilities.
Here are some examples of attacks on operating systems:
/H12012Exploiting specific protocol implementations
/H12012Attacking built-in authentication systems
/H12012Breaking file-system security
/H12012Cracking passwords and encryption mechanisms
Application and other specialized attacks
Applications take a lot of hits by hackers. Programs such as e-mail server
software and Web applications often are beaten down:13 Chapter 1: Introduction to Ethical Hacking04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 13
--- Page 37 ---
/H12012Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
(SMTP) applications are frequently attacked because most firewalls andother security mechanisms are configured to allow full access to theseprograms from the Internet.
/H12012Malicious software (malware) includes viruses, worms, Trojan horses,
and spyware. Malware clogs networks and takes down systems.
/H12012Spam (junk e-mail) is wreaking havoc on system availability and storage
space. And it can carry malware.
Ethical hacking helps reveal such attacks against your computer systems.Parts II through V of this book cover these attacks in detail, along with spe-cific countermeasures you can implement against attacks on your systems.
Obeying the Ethical Hacking
Commandments
Every ethical hacker must abide by a few basic commandments. If not, bad
things can happen. I’ve seen these commandments ignored or forgotten whenplanning or executing ethical hacking tests. The results weren’t positive.
Working ethically
The word ethical in this context can be defined as working with high profes-
sional morals and principles. Whether you’re performing ethical hacking testsagainst your own systems or for someone who has hired you, everything youdo as an ethical hacker must be aboveboard and must support the company’sgoals. No hidden agendas are allowed!
Trustworthiness is the ultimate tenet. The misuse of information is absolutely
forbidden. That’s what the bad guys do.
Respecting privacy
Treat the information you gather with the utmost respect. All information
you obtain during your testing — from Web-application log files to clear-textpasswords — must be kept private. Don’t use this information to snoop intoconfidential corporate information or private lives. If you sense that someoneshould know there’s a problem, consider sharing that information with theappropriate manager.14 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 14
--- Page 38 ---
Involve others in your process. This is a “watch the watcher” system that can
build trust and support your ethical hacking projects.
Not crashing your systems
One of the biggest mistakes I’ve seen when people try to hack their own sys-tems is inadvertently crashing their systems. The main reason for this is poorplanning. These testers have not read the documentation or misunderstandthe usage and power of the security tools and techniques.
You can easily create DoS conditions on your systems when testing. Running
too many tests too quickly on a system causes many system lockups. I knowbecause I’ve done this! Don’t rush things and assume that a network or spe-cific host can handle the beating that network scanners and vulnerability-assessment tools can dish out.
Many security-assessment tools can control how many tests are performed
on a system at the same time. These tools are especially handy if you need torun the tests on production systems during regular business hours.
You can even create an account or system lockout condition by social engi-
neering someone into changing a password, not realizing that doing so mightcreate a system lockout condition.
The Ethical Hacking Process
Like practically any IT or security project, ethical hacking needs to be plannedin advance. Strategic and tactical issues in the ethical hacking process shouldbe determined and agreed upon. Planning is important for any amount oftesting — from a simple password-cracking test to an all-out penetration teston a Web application.
Formulating your plan
Approval for ethical hacking is essential. Make what you’re doing known andvisible — at least to the decision makers. Obtaining sponsorship of the project
is the first step. This could be your manager, an executive, a customer, oreven yourself if you’re the boss. You need someone to back you up and signoff on your plan. Otherwise, your testing may be called off unexpectedly ifsomeone claims they never authorized you to perform the tests.15 Chapter 1: Introduction to Ethical Hacking04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 15
--- Page 39 ---
The authorization can be as simple as an internal memo from your boss if
you’re performing these tests on your own systems. If you’re testing for acustomer, have a signed contract in place, stating the customer’s support and
authorization. Get written approval on this sponsorship as soon as possibleto ensure that none of your time or effort is wasted. This documentation isyour Get Out of Jail Free card if anyone questions what you’re doing.
You need a detailed plan, but that doesn’t mean you have to have volumes oftesting procedures. One slip can crash your systems — not necessarily whatanyone wants. A well-defined scope includes the following information:
/H12012Specific systems to be tested
/H12012Risks that are involved
/H12012When the tests are performed and your overall timeline
/H12012How the tests are performed
/H12012How much knowledge of the systems you have before you start testing
/H12012What is done when a major vulnerability is discovered
/H12012The specific deliverables — this includes security-assessment reportsand a higher-level report outlining the general vulnerabilities to beaddressed, along with countermeasures that should be implemented
When selecting systems to test, start with the most critical or vulnerablesystems. For instance, you can test computer passwords or attempt social-engineering attacks before drilling down into more detailed systems.
It pays to have a contingency plan for your ethical hacking process in case
something goes awry. What if you’re assessing your firewall or Web applica-tion, and you take it down? This can cause system unavailability, which canreduce system performance or employee productivity. Even worse, it couldcause loss of data integrity, loss of data, and bad publicity.
Handle social-engineering and denial-of-service attacks carefully. Determine
how they can affect the systems you’re testing and your entire organization.
Determining when the tests are performed is something that you must think
long and hard about. Do you test during normal business hours? How aboutlate at night or early in the morning so that production systems aren’t affected?Involve others to make sure they approve of your timing.
The best approach is an unlimited attack, wherein any type of test is possi-
ble. The bad guys aren’t hacking your systems within a limited scope, so whyshould you? Some exceptions to this approach are performing DoS, social-engineering, and physical-security tests.
Don’t stop with one security hole. This can lead to a false sense of security.
Keep going to see what else you can discover. I’m not saying to keep hacking16 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 16
--- Page 40 ---
until the end of time or until you crash all your systems. Simply pursue the
path you’re going down until you can’t hack it any longer (pun intended).
One of your goals may be to perform the tests without being detected. For
example, you may be performing your tests on remote systems or on a r emote
office, and you don’t want the users to be aware of what you’re doing. Other-wise, the users may be on to you and be on their best behavior.
You don’t need extensive knowledge of the systems you’re testing — just a
basic understanding. This will help you protect the tested systems.
Understanding the systems you’re testing shouldn’t be difficult if you’re hack-
ing your own in-house systems. If you’re hacking a customer’s systems, youmay have to dig deeper. In fact, I’ve never had a customer ask for a fully blindassessment. Most people are scared of these assessments. Base the type oftest you will perform on your organization’s or customer’s needs.
Chapter 19 covers hiring “reformed” hackers.
Selecting tools
As with any project, if you don’t have the right tools for ethical hacking, accom-
plishing the task effectively is difficult. Having said that, just because you use
the right tools doesn’t mean that you will discover all vulnerabilities.
Know the personal and technical limitations. Many security-assessment tools
generate false positives and negatives (incorrectly identifying vulnerabilities).Others may miss vulnerabilities. If you’re performing tests such as social-engineering or physical-security assessments, you may miss weaknesses.
Many tools focus on specific tests, but no one tool can test for everything.
For the same reason that you wouldn’t drive in a nail with a screwdriver, youshouldn’t use a word processor to scan your network for open ports. This iswhy you need a set of specific tools that you can call on for the task at hand.The more tools you have, the easier your ethical hacking efforts are.
Make sure you that you’re using the right tool for the task:
/H12012To crack passwords, you need a cracking tool such as LC4, John the
Ripper, or pwdump.
A general port scanner, such as SuperScan, may not crack passwords.
/H12012For an in-depth analysis of a Web application, a Web-application assess-
ment tool (such as Whisker or WebInspect) is more appropriate than anetwork analyzer (such as Ethereal).17 Chapter 1: Introduction to Ethical Hacking04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 17
--- Page 41 ---
When selecting the right security tool for the task, ask around. Get advice
from your colleagues and from other people online. A simple Groups searchon Google (
www.google.com ) or perusal of security portals, such as
SecurityFocus.com, SearchSecurity.com, and ITsecurity.com, often producesgreat feedback from other security experts.
Hundreds, if not thousands, of tools can be used for ethical hacking — from
your own words and actions to software-based vulnerability-assessment pro-grams to hardware-based network analyzers. The following list runs downsome of my favorite commercial, freeware, and open-source security tools:
/H12012Nmap
/H12012EtherPeek
/H12012SuperScan
/H12012QualysGuard
/H12012WebInspect
/H12012LC4 (formerly called L0phtcrack)
/H12012LANguard Network Security Scanner
/H12012Network Stumbler
/H12012ToneLoc
Here are some other popular tools:
/H12012Internet Scanner
/H12012Ethereal
/H12012Nessus
/H12012Nikto
/H12012Kismet
/H12012THC-Scan
I discuss these tools and many others in Parts II through V when I go into thespecific hack attacks. Appendix A contains a more comprehensive listing ofthese tools for your reference.
The capabilities of many security and hacking tools are often misunderstood.
This misunderstanding has shed negative light on some excellent tools, suchas SATAN (Security Administrator Tool for Analyzing Networks) and Nmap(Network Mapper).
Some of these tools are complex. Whichever tools you use, familiarize yourself
with them before you start using them. Here are ways to do that:18 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 18
--- Page 42 ---
/H12012Read the readme and/or online help files for your tools.
/H12012Study the user’s guide for your commercial tools.
/H12012Consider formal classroom training from the security-tool vendor or
another third-party training provider, if available.
Look for these characteristics in tools for ethical hacking:
/H12012Adequate documentation.
/H12012Detailed reports on the discovered vulnerabilities, including how theymay be exploited and fixed.
/H12012Updates and support when needed.
/H12012High-level reports that can be presented to managers or nontechie types.
These features can save you time and effort when you’re writing the report.
Executing the plan
Ethical hacking can take persistence. Time and patience are important. Becareful when you’re performing your ethical hacking tests. A hacker in yournetwork or a seemingly benign employee looking over your shoulder maywatch what’s going on. This person could use this information against you.
It’s not practical to make sure that no hackers are on your systems before
you start. Just make sure you keep everything as quiet and private as possi-ble. This is especially critical when transmitting and storing your test results.If possible, encrypt these e-mails and files using Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) orsomething similar. At a minimum, password-protect them.
You’re now on a reconnaissance mission. Harness as much information as
possible about your organization and systems, which is what malicious hack-ers do. Start with a broad view and narrow your focus:
1. Search the Internet for your organization’s name, your computer and
network system names, and your IP addresses.
Google is a great place to start for this.
2. Narrow your scope, targeting the specific systems you’re testing.
Whether physical-security structures or Web applications, a casual
assessment can turn up much information about your systems.
3. Further narrow your focus with a more critical eye. Perform actual
scans and other detailed tests on your systems.
4. Perform the attacks, if that’s what you choose to do.19 Chapter 1: Introduction to Ethical Hacking04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 19
--- Page 43 ---
Evaluating results
Assess your results to see what you uncovered, assuming that the vulnerabil-
ities haven’t been made obvious before now. This is where knowledge counts.Evaluating the results and correlating the specific vulnerabilities discoveredis a skill that gets better with experience. You’ll end up knowing your systemsas well as anyone else. This makes the evaluation process much simplermoving forward.
Submit a formal report to upper management or to your customer, outlining
your results. Keep these other parties in the loop to show that your effortsand their money are well spent. Chapter 17 describes this process.
Moving on
When you’ve finished your ethical hacking tests, you still need to implementyour analysis and recommendations to make sure your systems are secure.
New security vulnerabilities continually appear. Information systems con-
stantly change and become more complex. New hacker exploits and securityvulnerabilities are regularly uncovered. You may discover new ones! Securitytests are a snapshot of the security posture of your systems. At any time,everything can change, especially after software upgrades, adding computersystems, or applying patches. Plan to test regularly (for example, once aweek or once a month). Chapter 19 covers managing security changes.20 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 04 55784x Ch01.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 20
--- Page 44 ---
Chapter 2
Cracking the Hacker Mindset
In This Chapter
/H17075Understanding the enemy
/H17075Profiling hackers
/H17075Understanding why hackers do what they do
/H17075Examining how hackers go about their business
Before you start assessing the security of your own systems, it helps to
know something about the enemies you’re up against. Many informa-
tion-security product vendors and other professionals claim that you shouldprotect your systems from the bad guys — both internal and external. Butwhat does this mean? How do you know how these bad guys think and work?
Knowing what hackers want helps you understand how they work. Under-
standing how they work helps you look at your information systems in a whole
new way. In this chapter, I describe what you’re up against, who’s actuallydoing the hacking, and what their motivations and methods are so you’rebetter prepared for your ethical hacking tests.
What You’re Up Against
Thanks to sensationalism, the definition of hacker has transformed from
harmless tinkerer to malicious criminal. Hackers often state that the generalpublic misunderstands them, which is mostly true. It’s easy to prejudge whatyou don’t understand. Hackers can be classified by both their abilities andunderlying motivations. Some are skilled, and their motivations are benign;they’re merely seeking more knowledge. At the other end of the spectrum,hackers with malicious intent seek some form of personal gain. Unfortunately,the negative aspects of hacking usually overshadow the positive aspects,resulting in the stereotyping.
Historically, hackers have hacked for the pursuit of knowledge and the thrill
of the challenge. Script kiddies aside, hackers are adventurous and innovativethinkers, and are always thinking about exploiting computer vulnerabilities.05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 21
--- Page 45 ---
(For more on script kiddies, see “Who Hacks,” later in this chapter.) They see
what others often overlook. They wonder what would happen if a cable wereunplugged, a switch were flipped, or lines of code were changed in a program.
These old-school hackers are like Tim the Toolman Taylor — Tim Allen’s char-
acter on the late, great sitcom Home Improvement — thinking mechanical and
electronic devices can be improved if they’re “rewired.” More recent evidenceshows that many hackers are hacking for political, competitive, and even finan-
cial purposes, so times are changing.
When they were growing up, hackers’ rivals were monsters and villains on
video game screens. Now hackers see their electronic foes as only that —electronic. Hackers who perform malicious acts don’t really think about thefact that human beings are behind the firewalls and Web applications they’reattacking. They ignore that their actions often affect those human beings innegative ways, such as jeopardizing their job security.
Hackers and the act of hacking drive the advancement of security technology.
After all, hackers don’t create security holes; they expose and exploit existingholes in applications. Unfortunately, security technology advances don’t wardoff all hacker attacks, because hackers constantly search for new holes andweaknesses. The only sure-fire way to keep the bad guys at bay is to use behav-ior modification to change them into productive, well-adjusted members ofsociety. Good luck with that.
However you view the stereotypical hacker, one thing is certain: Some people
always will try to take down your computer systems through manual hackingor by creating and launching automated worms and other malware. You musttake the appropriate steps to protect your systems against them.
Who Hacks
Computer hackers have been around for decades. Since the Internet becamewidely used in the late 1990s, we’ve started to hear more and more about hack-ing. Only a few hackers, such as John Draper (also known as Captain Crunch)and Kevin Mitnick, are well known. Gobs more unknown hackers are lookingto make a name for themselves. They’re the ones to look out for.
In a world of black and white, it’s easy to describe the typical hacker. A gen-
eral stereotype of a typical hacker is an antisocial, pimple-faced teenage boy.But the world has many shades of gray and, therefore, many types of hackers.Hackers are human like the rest of us and are, therefore, unique individuals,so an exact profile is hard to outline. The best broad description of hackers isthat all hackers aren’t equal. Each hacker has motives, methods, and skills.
But some general characteristics can help you understand them.
Not all hackers are antisocial, pimple-faced teenagers. Regardless, hackers
possess curiosity, bravado, and often very sharp minds.22 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 22
--- Page 46 ---
Just like anyone can become a thief, an arsonist, or a robber, anyone can
become a hacker, regardless of age, gender, or race. Given this diverse profile,skills vary widely from one malicious hacker to the next. Some hackers barelyknow how to surf the Internet, whereas others write software that other hack-ers and ethical hackers alike depend on.
/H12012Script kiddies: These are computer novices who take advantage of the
hacker tools and documentation available for free on the Internet butdon’t have any knowledge of what’s going on behind the scenes. Theyknow just enough to cause you headaches but typically are very sloppy intheir actions, leaving all sorts of digital fingerprints behind. Even thoughthese guys are the stereotypical hackers that you hear about in the newsmedia, they often need minimal skills to carry out their attacks.
/H12012Intermediate hackers: These halfway hackers usually know just enough
to cause serious problems. They know about computers and networks,and often use well-known exploits. Some want to be experts; given enoughtime and effort, they can be.
/H12012Elite hackers: These are skilled hacking experts. These are the people
who write many of the hacker tools, including the scripts and other pro-grams that the script kiddies use. These folks write such malware asviruses and worms. They can break into systems and cover their tracks.They can even make it look like someone else hacked the systems.
Elite hackers are often very secretive and share information with their
“subordinates” only when they are deemed worthy. Typically, for lower-ranked hackers to be considered worthy, they must possess some uniqueinformation or prove themselves through a high-profile hack. These hack-ers are your worst enemies in information security. Okay, maybe they’renot as bad as untrained end users, but that’s another issue. Fortunately,elite hackers are not as plentiful as script kiddies.
Other hacktivists try to disseminate political or social messages through theirwork. A hacktivist wants to raise public awareness of an issue. Examples of23 Chapter 2: Cracking the Hacker Mindset
Is the government hacking?
While in a conflict with another country, somegovernments will wage war via the Internet andother computer systems. For example, the U.S.government reportedly has launched cyber-attacks against its adversaries — such asYugoslavia during the Milosevic crisis in the late1990s and in the recent war in Iraq.
Are we headed toward a digital Pearl Harbor?
I’m not convinced that we are, but this methodof waging war is becoming more common astechnology progresses. Many folks are skepti-cal about this as well, and the U.S. govern-ment denies most of its involvement. However,because the world increasingly relies on com-puter and network technology, PCs, and theInternet, those avenues may become the launch-ing pads or battlegrounds for future conflicts.05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 23
--- Page 47 ---
hacktivism are the Web sites that were defaced with the Free Kevin messages
in the name of freeing Kevin Mitnick from prison for his famous hacking
escapades. Other cases of hacktivism include messages about legalizing marijuana, protests against the U.S. Navy spy plane that collided with theChinese fighter jet in 2001, the common hacker attacks between India andPakistan, and attacks against the U.S. White House Web site over the years.
Cyberterrorists attack government computers or public utility infrastructures,
such as power grids and air-traffic-control towers. They crash critical systems
or steal classified government information. Countries take these threats soseriously that many mandate information-security controls in such industriesas the power industry to protect essential systems against these attacks.
Hackers for hire are part of organized crime on the Internet. In late 2003, the
Korean National Police Agency busted the Internet’s largest organized hacking
ring, which had over 4,400 members. Prior to that, police in the Philippinesbusted a multimillion-dollar organized hacking ring that was selling cheapphone calls made through phone lines the ring had hacked into. Many ofthese hackers hire themselves out for money — and lots of it!
Why Hackers Hack
The main reason hackers hack is because they can! Okay, it goes a little deeper
than that. Hacking is a casual hobby for some hackers — they just hack to seewhat they can and can’t break into, usually testing only their own systems.These aren’t the folks I’m writing about here. I’m focusing on those hackerswho are obsessive and often have criminal intent.
Many hackers get a kick out of outsmarting corporate and government IT and
security administrators. They thrive on making headlines and being notoriouscyberoutlaws. Defeating an entity or possessing knowledge makes them feelbetter about themselves. Many of these hackers feed off instant gratification.They become obsessed with this feeling. Hackers can’t resist the adrenalinerush they get when breaking into someone else’s systems. Often, the moredifficult the job is, the greater the thrill.
The knowledge that malicious hackers gain and the elevated ego that comes
with that knowledge are like an addiction and a way of life. Some hackers wantto make your life miserable, and others simply want to be seen or heard. Somecommon hacker motives are revenge, basic bragging rights, curiosity, boredom,
challenge, vandalism, theft for financial gain, sabotage, blackmail, extortion, and
corporate espionage.
Hackers often promote individualism — or at least the decentralization of
information — because many believe that all information should be free.They think cyberattacks are different from attacks in the real world. Theyeasily ignore or misunderstand their victims and the consequences of hacking.24 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 24
--- Page 48 ---
Many hackers say they don’t intend to harm or profit through their bad deeds,
which helps them justify their work. They often don’t look for tangible payoffs.Just proving a point is often a good enough reward for them.
Many business owners and managers — even some network and security
administrators — believe that they don’t have anything that a hacker wants orthat hackers can’t do much damage if they break in. This couldn’t be furtherfrom the truth. This kind of thinking helps support hackers and their objec-tives. Hackers can compromise a seemingly unimportant system to accessthe network and use it as a launching pad for attacks on other systems.
It’s worth repeating that hackers often hack because they can. Some hackers
go for high-profile systems, but hacking into anyone’s system helps them fitinto hacker circles. Hackers use the false sense of security that many peoplehave and go for almost any system they think they can compromise. Theyknow that electronic information can be in more than one place at the sametime. It’s tough to prove that hackers took the information and possess it.
Similarly, hackers know that a simple defaced Web page — however easily
attacked — is not good for business. The following Web sites show examplesof Web pages that have been defaced in the past few years:
/H12012
www.2600.com/hacked_pages
/H12012www.onething.com/archive
Hacked sites like these can persuade management and other nonbelieversthat information threats and vulnerabilities should be addressed.
Hacking continues to get easier for several reasons:
/H12012Increasing use of networks and Internet connectivity
/H12012Anonymity provided by computer systems working over the Internet
/H12012Increasing number and availability of hacking tools
/H12012Computer-savvy children
/H12012Unlikelihood that hackers are investigated or prosecuted if caught
Although most hacker attacks go unnoticed or unreported, hackers who are
discovered are often not pursued or prosecuted. When they’re caught, hack-ers often rationalize their services as being altruistic and a benefit to society:They’re merely pointing out vulnerabilities before someone else does.Regardless, if justice is ever served, it helps eliminate the “fame and glory”reward system that hackers thrive on.
These criminal hackers are in the minority, so don’t think that you’re up
against millions of these villains. Many other hackers just love to tinker andonly seek knowledge of how computer systems work.25 Chapter 2: Cracking the Hacker Mindset05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 25
--- Page 49 ---
Planning and Performing Attacks
Hacking styles vary widely:
/H12012Some hackers prepare far in advance of a large attack. They gather
small bits of information and methodically carry out their hacks, as I
outline in Chapter 4. These hackers are more difficult to track.
/H12012Other hackers — usually, the inexperienced script kiddies — actbefore they think things through. For example, such hackers may try to
telnet directly into an organization’s router without hiding their identi-ties. Other hackers may try to launch a DoS attack against a MicrosoftExchange e-mail server without first determining what version ofExchange is running or what patches are installed.
These are the guys who usually get caught.
Although the hacker underground is a community, many of the hackers —
especially the elite hackers — don’t share information with the crowd. Mosthackers do much of their work independently from other hackers. Hackerswho network with one another use private bulletin board systems (BBSs),anonymous e-mail addresses, hacker Web sites, and Internet Relay Chat (IRC).
You can log on to many of these sites to see what hackers are doing.Whatever approach they take, most malicious hackers prey on ignorance.
They know the following aspects of real-world security:
/H12012The majority of systems that hackers want to attack aren’t managedproperly. The computer systems aren’t properly patched, hardened, andmonitored as they should be. Hackers often can attack by flying belowthe average radar of the firewalls, IDSs, and authentication systems.26 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 
Hacking in the name of liberty
Many hackers exhibit behaviors that contradict
what they’re fighting for — that is, they fight forcivil liberties and want to be left alone, and at thesame time, they love prying into other people’sbusiness. Many hackers claim to be civil liber-tarians supporting the principles of personal pri-vacy and freedom. However, they act in anentirely different way by intruding on the privacyand property of others. They often steal theproperty and rights of others, yet are willing togo to great lengths to get their own rights backfrom anyone who tries to take them away.
The case against copyrighted materials and
the Recording Industry Association of America(RIAA) is a classic example. Hackers have goneto great lengths to prove a point, from defacingthe Web sites of organizations that support copy-rights to illegally sharing music by using other-
wise legal mediums such as Kazaa, Gnutella,and Morpheus.05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 26
--- Page 50 ---
/H12012Most network and security administrators simply can’t keep up with the
deluge of new vulnerabilities.
/H12012Information systems grow more complex every year. This is yet anotherreason why overburdened administrators find it difficult to know what’shappening across the wire and on the hard drives of their systems.
Time is a hacker’s friend — and it always seems to be on the hacker’s side. Byattacking through computers rather than in person, hackers have more con-trol over when they can carry out their attacks.
/H12012Hack attacks can be carried out slowly, making them hard to detect.
/H12012They’re frequently carried out after typical business hours — often, inthe middle of the night. Defenses are often weaker at night — with lessphysical security and less intrusion monitoring — when the typical net-work administrator (or security guard) is sleeping.
If you want detailed information on how some hackers work or want to keepup with the latest hacker methods, several magazines are worth checking out:
/H120122600 — The Hacker Quarterly magazine (
www.2600.com ). I’ve found gobs
of great information in 2600.
/H12012PHRACK (www.phrack.org ).
/H12012Computer Underground Digest (www.soci.niu.edu/~cudigest ).
Also, check out Lance Spitzner’s Web site www.tracking-hackers.com for
some great information on using honeypots to track hacker behavior.
Hackers learn from their hacking mistakes. Every mistake moves them one
step closer to breaking into someone’s system. They use this wisdom whencarrying out future attacks.
Maintaining Anonymity
Smart hackers want to be as low-key as possible. Covering their tracks is a
priority. In fact, success often depends on it. They don’t want to raise suspi-cion so they can come back and access the systems in the future. Hackersoften remain anonymous by using one of the following techniques:
/H12012Borrowed or stolen dial-up accounts from friends or previous employers
/H12012Public computers at libraries, schools, or kiosks at the local mall
/H12012Internet proxy servers or anonymizer services
/H12012Anonymous or disposable e-mail accounts from free e-mail services27 Chapter 2: Cracking the Hacker Mindset05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 27
--- Page 51 ---
/H12012Open e-mail relays
/H12012Unsecured computers — also called zombies — at other organizations
/H12012Workstations or servers on the victim’s own network
If hackers use enough steppingstones for their attacks, they are hard to trace.28 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 05 55784x Ch02.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 28
--- Page 52 ---
Chapter 3
Developing Your Ethical
Hacking Plan
In This Chapter
/H17075Setting ethical hacking goals
/H17075Selecting which systems to test
/H17075Developing your ethical hacking testing standards
/H17075Examining hacking tools
As an ethical hacker, you must plan your ethical hacking efforts before you
start. A detailed plan doesn’t mean that your testing must be elaborate.
It just means that you’re very clear and concise on what’s done. Given theseriousness of ethical hacking, make this as structured a process as possible.
Even if you’re just testing a single Web application or workgroup of comput-
ers, it’s critical to establish your goals, define and document the scope ofwhat you’ll be testing, determine your testing standards, and gather andfamiliarize yourself with the proper tools for the task. This chapter coversthese steps to help you create a positive ethical hacking environment so youcan set yourself up for success.
Getting Your Plan Approved
Getting approval for ethical hacking is critical. First, obtain project sponsor-ship. This approval can come from your manager, an executive, a customer,or yourself (if you’re the boss). Otherwise, your testing may be canceled sud-denly, or someone can deny authorizing the tests. There can even be legalconsequences for unauthorized hacking. Always make sure that what you’redoing is known and visible — at least to the decision-makers. Chapter 20outlines ten tips for getting upper management’s buy-in on your securityinitiatives.06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 29
--- Page 53 ---
If you’re an independent consultant or have a business with a team of ethical
hackers, consider getting professional liability (also known as errors and
omissions ) insurance from an agent who specializes in business insurance
coverage. This kind of insurance can be expensive, but it can be well worth it.
The authorization can be as simple as an internal memo from upper manage-
ment if you’re performing these tests on your own systems. If you’re perform-ing testing for a customer, you must have a signed contract in place, statingthe customer’s support and authorization. Get written approval as soon aspossible to ensure that your time and efforts are not wasted. This documen-tation is your security if anyone questions what you’re doing.
Establishing Your Goals
Your ethical hacking plan needs goals. The main goal of ethical hacking is tofind vulnerabilities in your systems so you can make them more secure. Youcan then take this a step further:
/H12012Define more specific goals. Align these goals with your business
objectives.
/H12012Create a specific schedule with start and end dates. These dates are
critical components of your overall plan.
Before you begin any ethical hacking, you absolutely, positively need every-thing in writing and signed-off on.
Document everything, and involve upper management in this process. Your
best ally in your ethical hacking efforts is a manager who supports whatyou’re doing.
The following questions can start the ball rolling:
/H12012Does ethical hacking support the mission of the business and its IT and
security departments?
/H12012What business goals are met by performing ethical hacking?
These goals may include the following:
• Prepping for the internationally accepted security framework of
ISO 17799 or a security seal such as SysTrust or WebTrust
• Meeting federal regulations• Improving the company’s image
/H12012How will ethical hacking improve security, IT, and the general business?
/H12012What information are you protecting?30 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 30
--- Page 54 ---
This could be intellectual property, confidential customer information,
or private employee information.
/H12012How much money, time, and effort are you and your organization willingto spend on ethical hacking?
/H12012What specific deliverables will there be?
Deliverables can include anything from high-level executive reports to
detailed technical reports and write-ups on what you tested along with
the outcomes of your tests. You can deliver specific information that isgleaned during your testing, such as passwords and other confidentialinformation.
/H12012What specific outcomes do you want?
Desired outcomes include the justification for hiring or outsourcing secu-
rity personnel, increasing your security budget, or enhancing securitysystems.
People within your organization may attempt to keep you from performingyour ethical hacking plans. The best antidote is education. Show how ethicalhacking helps support the business in everyone’s favor.
After you know your goals, document the steps to get there. For example, if
one goal is to develop a competitive advantage to keep existing customersand attract new ones, determine the answers to these questions:
/H12012When will you start your ethical hacking?
/H12012Will your ethical hacking be blind, in which you know nothing about thesystems you’re testing, or a knowledge-based attack, in which you’regiven specific information about the systems you’re testing such as IPaddresses, hostnames, and even usernames and passwords?
/H12012Will this testing be technical in nature or involve physical securityassessments or even social engineering?
/H12012Will you be part of a larger ethical hacking team, often called a tiger team
or red team?
/H12012Will you notify your customers of what you’re doing? If so, how?
Customer notification is a critical issue. Many customers appreciate that
you’re taking steps to protect their information. Approach the testing ina positive way. Don’t say, “We’re breaking into our systems to see whatinformation of yours is vulnerable to hackers.” Instead, you can say thatyou’re assessing the overall security of your systems so the informationis as secure as possible from the bad guys.
/H12012How will you notify customers that the organization is taking steps toenhance the security of their information?
/H12012What measurements can ensure that these efforts are paying off?31 Chapter 3: Developing Your Ethical Hacking Plan06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 31
--- Page 55 ---
Establishing your goals takes time, but you won’t regret it. These goals are
your road map. If you have any concerns, refer to these goals to make surethat you stay on track.
Determining What Systems to Hack
You probably don’t want — or need — to assess the security of all your sys-tems at the same time. This could be quite an undertaking and could lead toproblems. I’m not saying you shouldn’t eventually assess every computer andapplication you have. I’m just suggesting that whenever possible, you shouldbreak your ethical hacking projects into smaller chunks to make them moremanageable. You may decide which systems to test based on a high-level riskanalysis, answering questions such as:
/H12012What are your most critical systems? Which systems, if hacked, wouldcause the most trouble or the greatest losses?
/H12012Which systems appear to be most vulnerable to attack?
/H12012Which systems are not documented, are rarely administered, or are theones you know the least about?
After you’ve established your overall goals, decide which systems to test.This step helps you carefully define a scope for your ethical hacking so thatyou not only establish everyone’s expectations up front, but also better esti-mate the time and resources for the job.
The following list includes systems and applications that you may consider
performing your hacking tests on:
/H12012Routers
/H12012Firewalls
/H12012Network infrastructure as a whole
/H12012Wireless access points and bridges
/H12012Web, application, and database servers
/H12012E-mail and file/print servers
/H12012Workstations, laptops, and tablet PCs
/H12012Mobile devices (such as PDAs and cell phones) that store confidentialinformation
/H12012Client and server operating systems
/H12012Client and server applications, such as e-mail or other in-house systems32 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 32
--- Page 56 ---
What specific systems you should test depends on several factors. If you have
a small network, you can test everything from the get-go. You may considertesting just public-facing hosts such as e-mail and Web servers and theirassociated applications. The ethical hacking process is flexible. Base thesedecisions on what makes the most business sense.
Start with the most vulnerable systems, and consider the following factors:
/H12012Where the computer or application resides on the network
/H12012Which operating system and application(s) it runs
/H12012The amount or type of critical information stored on it
If you’re hacking your own systems or a customer’s systems, a previous
security-risk assessment or vulnerability test may already have generatedthis information. If so, that documentation may help identify systems formore testing.
Ethical hacking goes a few steps beyond the higher-level information risk
assessments and vulnerability testing. As an ethical hacker, you first gleaninformation on all systems — including the organization as a whole — andthen further assess the systems that appear most vulnerable. I discuss theethical hacking methodology in more detail in Chapter 4.
Another factor to help you decide where to start is to assess the systems that
have the greatest visibility. For example, focusing on a database or file serverthat stores customer or other critical information may make more sense — atleast initially — than concentrating on a firewall or Web server that hostsmarketing information about the company.
Creating Testing Standards
One miscommunication or slip-up can send your systems crashing duringyour ethical hacking tests. No one wants that to happen. To prevent mishaps,develop and document testing standards. These standards should include
/H12012When the tests are performed, along with the overall timeline
/H12012What tests are performed
/H12012How the tests are performed, and from where
/H12012How much knowledge of the systems you acquire in advance
/H12012What you do when a major vulnerability is discovered
This is a list of general best practices. You can apply more standards for yoursituation.33 Chapter 3: Developing Your Ethical Hacking Plan06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 33
--- Page 57 ---
Timing
You know they say that it’s “all in the timing.” This is especially true when
performing ethical hacking tests. Make sure that the tests you’re performingminimize disruption to business processes, information systems, and people.You want to avoid situations like miscommunicating the timing of tests andcausing a DoS attack against a high-traffic e-commerce site in the middle ofthe day, or forcing yourself or others to perform password-cracking tests inthe middle of the night. It’s amazing what a 12-hour time difference can make!Everyone in the project should agree on a detailed timeline before you begin.This puts everyone on the same page and sets correct expectations.
Notify any Internet Service Providers (ISP) or Application Service Providers
(ASPs) involved before performing any tests across the Internet. This way,ISPs and ASPs will be aware of the testing going on, which will minimize thechance that they will block your traffic if they suspect malicious behaviorthat shows up on their firewalls or Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs).
The timeline should include specific short-term dates and times of each test,
the start and end dates, and any specific milestones in between. You candevelop and enter your timeline into a simple spreadsheet or Gantt chart, oryou can include the timeline as part of your initial customer proposal andcontract. For example, you could use a timeline similar to the following:
Test Performed Tester Start Time Projected End Time
War dial Tommy Tinker July 1, 6:00 a.m. July 1, 10:00 a.m.
Password cracking Amy Trusty July 2, 12:00 p.m. July 2, 5:00 p.m.
This timeline will keep things simple and provide a reference during testing.
Specific tests
You may have been charged with performing a general penetration test , or you
may want to perform specific tests, such as cracking passwords or war-dialinginto a network. Or you might be performing a social-engineering test or assess-ing the Windows operating systems on the network. However you’re testing,you may want to conceal the specifics of the testing to keep what you’re doingcovert or to protect your methodologies. In fact, your manager or customermay not want the details. Either way, document and make known at a high levelwhat you’re doing. This can help eliminate any potential miscommunicationand keep you out of hot water.
A good way to provide evidence of what was tested, when it was tested, and
more is to enable logging on the systems you’re testing.34 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 34
--- Page 58 ---
Sometimes, you may know the general tests that you’re performing, but if you’re
using automated tools, it may be next to impossible to understand completelyevery test you’re performing. This is especially true if the software you’re usingreceives real-time vulnerability-testing updates from the vendor every time yourun it. The potential for frequent updates underscores the importance of read-ing the documentation and readme files that come with the tools you’re using.
I have experienced surprising vulnerability updates in the past. I was perform-
ing an automated assessment on a customer’s Web site — the same test I hadjust performed the previous week. The customer and I had scheduled the testdate and time in advance. What I didn’t know is that the software vendor made
some changes to its Web form submission tests, and I flooded the customer’sWeb application, creating a DoS condition.
Luckily, this DoS condition occurred after business hours and didn’t affect
the customer’s operations. However, the customer’s Web application wascoded to generate an alert e-mail for every form submission. The applicationdeveloper and company’s president received 4,000 e-mails in their inboxeswithin about 10 minutes — ouch! I was lucky that the president was tech-savvy and understood the situation. It’s important to have a contingency planin case a situation like this occurs.
Blind versus knowledge assessments
It may be good to have some knowledge of the systems you’re testing, but it’snot required. However, a basic understanding of the systems you’re hackingcan protect you and others. Obtaining this knowledge shouldn’t be difficult ifyou’re hacking your own in-house systems. If you’re hacking a customer’ssystems, you may have to dig a little deeper into how the systems work soyou know what’s what. That’s how I’ve always done it. In fact, I’ve never hada customer ask for a fully blind assessment. Most people are scared of theseassessments. This doesn’t mean that blind assessments aren’t valuable. Thetype of assessment you carry out depends on your specific needs.
The best approach is to plan on unlimited attacks, wherein any test is possible.
The bad guys aren’t hacking your systems within a limited scope, so why
should you?
Consider whether the tests should be undetected. This isn’t required but
should be considered, especially for social-engineering and physical securitytests. I outline specific tests for those subjects in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6.
A false sense of vigilance can be created if too many insiders know about your
testing which can end up negating the hard work you’re putting into this.This doesn’t mean you shouldn’t tell anyone. Always have a main point ofcontact within the organization — preferably someone with decision-makingauthority — that both you and all employees can contact if and when some-thing goes wrong.35 Chapter 3: Developing Your Ethical Hacking Plan06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 35
--- Page 59 ---
Location
The tests you’re performing dictate where you must run them from. Your goal
is to hack your systems from locations where malicious hackers can accessthe systems. You can’t predict whether you’ll be attacked by a hacker fromoutside or inside your network, so cover all your bases. Combine external(public Internet) tests and internal (private network) tests.
You can perform some tests, such as password cracking and network-infra-
structure assessments, from the comfort of your office — inside the network.But it may be better to have a true outsider perform other tests on routers,firewalls, and public Web applications.
For your external hacks that require network connectivity, you may have to
go off-site (a good excuse to work from home) or use an external proxy server.Better yet, if you can assign an available public IP address to your computer,plug into the network on the outside of the firewall for a hacker’s-eye view ofyour systems. Internal tests are easy because you need only physical accessto the building and the network.
Reacting to major exploits that you find
Determine ahead of time whether you’ll stop or keep going when you find acritical security hole. Your manager or your customer may not ask you to,but I think it’s best to keep going to see what else you can discover. I’m notsaying to keep hacking until the end of time or until you crash all your sys-tems. Simply pursue the path you’re going down until you can’t hack it anylonger (pun intended).
Silly assumptions
You’ve heard what you make of yourself when you assume things. Even so,you must make assumptions when you hack your systems. Here are someexamples of those assumptions:
/H12012Computers, networks, and people are available when you’re testing.
/H12012You have all the proper hacking tools.
/H12012The hacking tools you’re using won’t crash your systems.
/H12012Your hacking tools actually work.
/H12012You know all the risks of your tests.
You should document all assumptions and have management or your cus-tomer sign off on them as part of your overall approval process.36 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 36
--- Page 60 ---
Selecting Tools
The required security-assessment tools (hacking tools) depend on the tests
you’re running. You can perform some ethical hacking tests with a pair of
sneakers, a telephone, and a basic workstation on the network. However,comprehensive testing is easier with hacking tools.
Not only do you need an arsenal of tools, but you should also use the right
tool for the task:
/H12012If you’re cracking passwords, a general port scanner such as SuperScanor Nmap may not do the trick. For this task, you need a tool such as LC4,John the Ripper, or pwdump.
/H12012If you’re attempting an in-depth analysis of a Web application, a Web-application assessment tool (such as Nikto or WebInspect) is moreappropriate than a network analyzer such as Ethereal.
If you’re not sure what tools to use, fear not. Throughout this book, I intro-duce a wide variety of tools — both free and commercial — that you can useto accomplish your tasks.
You can choose among hundreds, if not thousands, of tools for ethical
hacking — everything from your own words and actions to software-basedvulnerability-assessment programs to hardware-based network analyzers.Here’s a rundown of some of my favorite commercial, freeware, and open-source security tools:
/H12012@stake L0phtcrack (now called LC4)
/H12012Ethereal
/H12012Foundstone SuperScan
/H12012Qualys QualysGuard
/H12012GFI LANguard Network Security Scanner
/H12012John the Ripper
/H12012Network Stumbler
/H12012Nessus
/H12012Nikto
/H12012Nmap
/H12012Pwdump2
/H12012SPI Dynamics WebInspect
/H12012THC-RUT
/H12012ToneLoc37 Chapter 3: Developing Your Ethical Hacking Plan06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 37
--- Page 61 ---
/H12012Wellenreiter
/H12012WildPackets EtherPeek and AiroPeek
I discuss these tools, including details on how to use many of them, in Parts II
through V when I cover specific hack attacks. Appendix A contains a morecomprehensive listing of these tools for your reference.
The capabilities of many security and hacking tools are often misunderstood.
This misunderstanding has shed negative light on some excellent tools, suchas SATAN (Security Administrator Tool for Analyzing Networks) and Nmap(Network Mapper). It’s important to know what each tool can and can’t doand how to use each one. I suggest reading the manual and other help files.Unfortunately, some tools have limited documentation, which can be prettyfrustrating when you’re trying to use those tools. You can search newsgroupsand message boards and post a message if you’re having trouble with a tool.
Hacking tools can be hazardous to your network’s health. Be careful when
using them. Always make sure that you understand what every option doesbefore you use it. Try your tools on test systems if you’re not sure how to usethem. These precautions help prevent DoS conditions and loss of dataintegrity and availability on your production systems.
Look for these characteristics in the tools you select for ethical hacking:
/H12012Adequate documentation.
/H12012Detailed reports on the vulnerabilities, including how they may be
exploited and fixed.
/H12012Updates and support when needed.
/H12012High-level reports that can be presented to managers or other nontechietypes. These reports can save you time and effort when you’re writingthe report. I cover the reporting process in Chapter 17.
Know the limitations of your tools and of yourself. Many security-assessmenttools generate false positives — alerting to a vulnerability when it doesn’treally exist. Some even generate false negatives, which means they miss thevulnerabilities altogether. Likewise, if you’re performing social-engineeringtests or physical-security assessments, it’s only human to miss specificvulnerabilities.
You may despise some “popular” freeware and open-source hacking tools. If
these tools end up causing you more headaches than they’re worth or don’tdo what you need them to do, consider purchasing commercial alternatives.They’re often easier to use and typically generate better reports faster —especially high-level executive reports. Some commercial tools are quiteexpensive, but their ease of use and functionality may justify the cost.38 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 06 55784x Ch03.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 38
--- Page 62 ---
Chapter 4
Hacking Methodology
In This Chapter
/H17075Examining steps for successful ethical hacking
/H17075Gleaning information about your organization from the Internet
/H17075Scanning your network
/H17075Looking for vulnerabilities
Before you start testing your systems, plan a basic methodology. Ethical
hacking involves more than just penetrating and patching. Proven tech-
niques can help guide you along the hacking highway and ensure that youend up at the right destination. Planning a methodology that supports yourethical hacking goals is what separates the professionals from the amateurs.
Setting the Stage
In the past, ethical hacking was mostly a manual process. Now, tools canautomate various tasks. These tools allow you to focus on performing thetests instead of on your testing methods. However, it’s important to follow ageneral methodology and understand what’s going on behind the scenes.
Ethical hacking is similar to beta testing software. Think logically — like a
programmer — dissecting and interacting with all the network componentsto see how they work. You gather information — often small pieces — andassemble the pieces of the puzzle. You start at point A with several goals inmind, hack (repeating many steps along the way), and move closer until youdiscover security vulnerabilities at point B.
The process that ethical hacking is built around is basically the same as what
a malicious hacker would use. The goals and how you achieve them are dif-ferent. In addition, as an ethical hacker, you will eventually attempt to assessallinformation-security vulnerabilities and properly address them, rather
than run a single exploit. Today’s attacks can come from any angle againstany system, not just from the perimeter of your network and the Internet.Test every possible entry point, including partner, vendor, and customer
networks, as well as home users, wireless LANs, and modems.07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 39
--- Page 63 ---
When you start rolling with your ethical hacking, keep detailed logs of every
test you perform, every system you test, and your results. This informationcan help you do the following:
/H12012Track what worked in previous tests and why.
/H12012Help prove that you didn’t maliciously hack the systems.
/H12012Correlate your testing with intrusion-detection systems and other logfiles if questions arise.
In addition to taking general notes, it’s also helpful to take screen captures ofyour results whenever possible. These will come in handy later if you need toshow proof of what occurred, as well as when you’re generating your finalreport. Chapter 1 lists the general steps of ethical hacking.
These steps don’t include specific information on the low-tech hacking methods
that you will use for social engineering and assessing physical security, butthe techniques are basically the same. I cover these methods in more detailin Chapters 5 and 6.
Your main task is to simulate information-gathering and system compromises
carried out by a hacker. This can be either a partial attack on one computeror a comprehensive attack against the entire organization. Generally, you’relooking for what both inside and outside hackers see. You want to assessinternal systems (processes and procedures that involve computers, net-works, people, and physical infrastructures). Look for vulnerabilities; checkhow all your systems interconnect and how private systems and informationare protected from untrusted elements.
If you’re performing ethical hacking for a customer, you may go the blind-
assessment route and start with just the company name and no other infor-mation that gives you a leg up, such as:
/H12012IP addresses
/H12012Host names
/H12012Software versions
/H12012Firewall rules
/H12012Phone numbers
/H12012Employee names
This blind-assessment approach allows you to start from ground zero andgives you a better sense of what information hackers can access publicly.
As an ethical hacker, you may not have to worry about covering your tracks
or evading intrusion-detection systems, because everything you’re doing islegitimate. But then again, one of your goals may be to test systems in a stealthy40 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 40
--- Page 64 ---
fashion. I discuss techniques that hackers use to conceal their actions in later
chapters and outline some countermeasures for them as well. I don’t discusscovering your tracks in the overall ethical hacking methodology.
Seeing What Others See
Your reconnaissance mission can turn up a ton of information about yourorganization and systems that the whole world can see. This process is oftencalled footprinting. Here’s how to gather the information:
/H12012Start by using a Web browser to search the Web for information aboutyour organization.
With the resources available on the Internet, you can gather information
until the end of time. Unless you’re really bored or trying to take advan-
tage of AOL’s introductory offer to stay online for free for 23 hours a day,I don’t recommend it!
/H12012Discover more-specific information about your systems from a hacker’sviewpoint. You can determine this information by running network scans,probing ports, and assessing vulnerability.
Whether you’re searching generally or probing more technically, you ulti-mately should limit the amount of information you gather based on what’sreasonable for you. You may spend an hour, a day, or a week gathering thisinformation — it all just depends on how large your organization is and thecomplexity of your information systems.
Gathering public information
The amount of information you can passively gather usually is staggering.This information is all over the Internet. It’s your job to find out what every-one knows about you. This information positions hackers to target specificareas, including departments and individuals.
Web search
Performing a Web search or simply browsing your Web site can turn up thefollowing information:
/H12012Employee names and contact info
/H12012Important company dates
/H12012Incorporation filings for private companies41 Chapter 4: Hacking Methodology07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 41
--- Page 65 ---
/H12012SEC filings for public companies
/H12012Press releases on moves, organizational changes, and new products
/H12012Mergers and acquisitions
/H12012Patents and trademarks
/H12012Presentations, articles, and Webcasts
My favorite tool — the favorite of many hackers — is Google ( www.google.
com). It ferrets out information — from word-processing documents to graph-
ics files — on any publicly accessible computer. It’s free, too! There are entire
books on using Google. Appendix A lists my favorite resources. With Google,you can search the Internet several ways:
/H12012By typing keywords: This often reveals dozens and sometimes hun-
dreds of pages of information — such as files, phone numbers, andaddresses — that you never guessed were available.
/H12012By performing more advanced Web searches: Google’s advanced search
options can find sites that link back to your company’s Web site. Thistype of search often reveals a lot of information about partners, vendors,clients, and other affiliations.
/H12012By using switches to dig deeper into a Web site: For example, if you
want to find a certain word or file on your Web site, simply enter a linelike one of the following into Google:
site:www.your_domain.com keyword
site:www.your_domain.com filename
Web crawling
Web-crawling utilities such as BlackWidow can mirror your Web site by down-loading every publicly accessible file from it. You can then inspect
/H12012The Web site layout and configuration offline.
/H12012The HTML source code of Web pages.
/H12012Comment fields. These fields contain such information as names ande-mail addresses of the developers and internal IT personnel, servernames, software versions, and internal addressing schemes.
Web sites
These Web sites may provide specific information about your organization: 
/H12012Government and business Web sites:
•www.hoovers.com and finance.yahoo.com for detailed informa-
tion about public companies42 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 42
--- Page 66 ---
•www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml for SEC filings on public companies
•www.uspto.gov for patent and trademark registrations
• The Web site for your state’s Secretary of State or similar organiza-
tion for incorporation and corporate officer information
/H12012Background checks through companies such as ChoicePoint
(www.choicepoint.com ) and USSearch ( www.ussearch.com )
Mapping the network
When you’re mapping out your network, you can search public databasesand resources to see what the hackers know about you.
Whois
The best starting point is to perform a Whois lookup by using any one of theWhois tools available on the Internet. Whois is the tool you’ve most likely
used to check whether a particular Internet domain name is available.
For ethical hacking, Whois provides information that can give a hacker a leg
up to start a social-engineering attack or to scan your network:
/H12012Internet domain-name information, such as contact names and addresses
/H12012DNS servers responsible for your domain
You can look up Whois information at one of the following places:
/H12012A domain registrar’s site, such as 
www.networksolutions.com or
www.registerfly.com .
/H12012An ISP’s tech-support page.
My favorite Whois tool is Sam Spade ( www.samspade.org ). You can use its
Web site or download its Windows-based tool, shown in Figure 4-1.
You can run DNS queries directly from the site or download the site’s Windows-
based tool and run it from your PC. Sam Spade can 
/H12012Display general domain-registration information
/H12012Show which host handles e-mail (the Mail Exchanger or MX record) for adomain
/H12012Determine whether the host is listed on some spam blacklists43 Chapter 4: Hacking Methodology07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 43
--- Page 67 ---
The following list runs down various lookup sites for other categories:
/H12012Government: whois.nic.gov
/H12012Military: whois.nic.mil
/H12012AfriNIC: www.afrinic.org (emerging Regional Internet Registry for
Africa)
/H12012APNIC: www.apnic.net/search/index.html (Regional Internet
Registry for the Asia Pacific Region)
/H12012ARIN: www.arin.net/whois/index.html (Regional Internet Registry
for North America, a portion of the Caribbean, and subequatorial Africa)
/H12012LACNIC: Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry
www.lacnic.net
/H12012RIPE Network Coordination Centre: www.ripe.net/db/whois/
whois.html (Europe, Central Asia, African countries north of the
equator, and the Middle East)
Alldomains.com offers a reverse Whois service called D-Tective. This paid
service finds specific Internet domains for a domain name, a phone number,
or an address.
Figure 4-1:
The Sam
Spade
graphical
interface.44 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 44
--- Page 68 ---
Google groups
The Google Groups at groups.google.com can reveal surprising public
network information. Search for such information as your hostnames, IP
addresses, and usernames. You can search hundreds of millions of Usenetposts back to 1981 for public and often very private information.
You might find some information such as the following that you didn’t realize
was being made public:
/H12012A tech-support or similar message that divulges too much informationabout your systems. Many people who post messages to Usenet don’trealize that their messages are shared with the world.
/H12012Disgruntled employees or customers who have posted confidential infor-mation about your company.
A few years ago, I was helping some folks at an Internet startup companyselect a telephone service vendor. I searched Google Groups for a vendorthey were interested in and turned up some interesting information aboutthe telephone service’s network. Apparently, its network administrator hadposted some messages to a tech-support site that revealed his full name ande-mail address, specific server names, IP addresses, and network configura-tion information of its internal systems. My customer used another vendor.
If you discover that confidential information is posted about your company,
you may be able to get it removed. Check out the Google Groups help page at
groups.google.com/googlegroups/help.html for details.
Privacy policies
Check your Web site’s privacy policy. A good practice is to disclose basicinformation about how user information is protected. 
Make sure that the people writing privacy policies don’t divulge details about
your information-security infrastructure. An Internet startup businessmanonce contacted me about business opportunities. During the conversation,he was bragging about his company’s security systems to ensure the privacyof client information. I went to his Web site to check out his privacy policy.He had posted the brand and model of firewall he was using. Not a good idea!
Scanning Systems
Active information gathering produces more details about your network andhelps you see your systems from a hacker’s perspective. For instance, you can45 Chapter 4: Hacking Methodology07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 45
--- Page 69 ---
/H12012Use the information provided by your Whois lookups and start testing
other closely related IP addresses and host names. When you map out —enumerate — your network, you see how your systems are laid out. 
This includes determining IP addresses, host names (both external and internal), running protocols, open ports, and running servicesand applications.
/H12012Scan your internal hosts — if they are within the scope of your testing.These hosts may not be visible to outsiders, but you should test them.The hacker may be on the inside!
If you’re not completely comfortable scanning your systems, consider firstusing a lab with test systems or a system running virtual-machine softwaresuch as VMware Workstation or Microsoft’s Virtual PC. Some hacking toolsmay not work as designed when you run them on virtual-machine software. Ifyou have trouble getting the software to load or hosts to respond, you mayhave to run your tests against physically separate computers.
Hosts
Scan and document specific hosts that are reachable from the Internet. Startby pinging either specific host names or IP addresses with one of these:
/H12012The basic ping utility that’s built into your operating system
/H12012A third-party utility that allows you to ping multiple addresses at thesame time, such as SuperScan (
www.foundstone.com ) and NetScanTools
Pro (www.netscantools.com ) for Windows and fping for UNIX (which
allows you to ping more than one address)
The site www.whatismyip.com shows how your gateway IP address appears
on the Internet. Just browse to that site. Your outermost public IP address(your firewall or router — preferably not your local computer) appears.
Modems and open ports
Scan for modems and open ports by using network-scanning tools:
/H12012Check for unsecured modems with war-dialing software, such as ToneLoc,PhoneSweep, and THC-Scan. I cover war dialing in Chapter 8.
/H12012Scan network ports with SuperScan or Nmap (
www.insecure.org/
nmap ). You can use a happy-clicky-GUI version made for Windows called
NMapWin, shown in Figure 4-2. See Chapter 9 for details.
/H12012Listen to network traffic with a network analyzer such as Ethereal. I coverthis topic in various chapters throughout the book.46 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 46
--- Page 70 ---
Scanning internally is easy. Simply connect your PC to the network, load up
the software, and fire away. Scanning from outside your network takes a few
more steps, but it can be done:
/H12012For war dialing, scanning shouldn’t be an issue. You can just use one of
your internal analog lines to dial out from.
/H12012Pinging and scanning is more complicated. The easiest way to connectand get an “outside-in” perspective is to assign yourself a public IPaddress and plug your workstation into a switch or hub on the publicside of your firewall or router. Physically, you’re not on the Internet look-ing in, but this type of connection works just the same.
Determining What’s Running
on Open Ports
As an ethical hacker, you should glean as much information as possible after
scanning your systems. You can often identify the following information:
/H12012Protocols in use, such as IP, IPX, and NetBEUI
/H12012Services running on the hosts, such as e-mail and database applications
Figure 4-2:
The
NMapWin
graphical
interface.47 Chapter 4: Hacking Methodology07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 47
--- Page 71 ---
/H12012Available remote-access services, such as Windows Terminal Services
and Secure Shell (SSH)
/H12012VPN services, such as PPTP, SSL, and IPSec
/H12012Required authentication for network shares
You can look for the following open ports (your network scanning programreports these as open):
/H12012Ping (ICMP echo) replies; ICMP traffic is allowed to and from the host
/H12012TCP port 20 and/or 21, showing that FTP is running
/H12012TCP port 23, showing that telnet is running
/H12012TCP ports 25 or 465 (SMTP), 110 or 995 (POP3), or 143 or 993 (IMAP),showing that an e-mail server is running
/H12012TCP/UDP port 53, showing that a DNS server is running
/H12012TCP ports 80 and 443, showing that a Web server is running
/H12012TCP/UDP ports 137, 138, and 139, showing that an unprotected Windowshost is running
Thousands of ports can be open — 65,535, to be exact. I cover many popularport numbers when describing hacks throughout this book. A listing of allwell-known port numbers (ports 1–1023) and registered port numbers (ports1024–49151), with their associated protocols and services, is located at
www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers . You can also perform a port-
number lookup at www.cotse.com/cgi-bin/port.cgi .
If you detect a Web server running on the system you’re testing, you cancheck the software version by using one of the following methods:
/H12012Type the site’s name, followed by a page that you know doesn’t exist,such as 
www.your_domain.com/1234.html . Many Web servers return
an error page showing detailed version information.
/H12012Use Netcraft’s Web server-search utility ( www.netcraft.com ), which
connects to your server from the Internet and displays the Web-serverversion and operating system, as shown in Figure 4-3.
You can dig deeper for more specific information on your hosts. This revealswhat software version is running on the systems and more:
/H12012NMapWin can determine the system OS version; refer to Figure 4-2.
/H12012An enumeration utility (such as DumpSec) can extract users, groups,and file and share permissions directly from Windows.
/H12012Many systems return useful banner information when you connect to aservice or application running on a port. For example, if you telnet to an48 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 48
--- Page 72 ---
e-mail server on port 25 by entering telnet mail.your_domain.com
25at a command prompt, you may see something like this:
220 mail.your_domain.com ESMTP all_the_version_info_
you’ll_ever_need Ready
Most e-mail servers return detailed information, such as the version and
the current service pack installed. After you have this information, you(and hackers) can determine what vulnerabilities are present on thesystem from some of the Web sites listed in the next section.
/H12012An e-mail to an invalid address may return with detailed e-mail headerinformation. A bounced message often discloses lots of information thatcan be used against you, including internal IP addresses and softwareversions. On certain Windows systems, you can map drives and establishother types of network connections. I cover these issues in Chapter 11.
Assessing Vulnerabilities
After finding potential security holes, test whether they are vulnerabilities.Before you test, perform some manual searching. You can research hackermessage boards, Web sites, and vulnerability databases, such as these:
/H12012Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (
cve.mitre.org/cve )
/H12012CERT/CC Vulnerability Notes Database ( www.kb.cert.org/vuls )
/H12012NIST ICAT Metabase ( icat.nist.gov/icat.cfm )
These sites list practically every known vulnerability. If you can’t find a vulner-ability documented on one of these sites, search the vendor’s site. You can find
Figure 4-3:
Netcraft’s
Web-server
version
utility.49 Chapter 4: Hacking Methodology07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 49
--- Page 73 ---
a list of commonly exploited vulnerabilities at www.sans.org/top20 . This is
the SANS Top 20 Internet Security Vulnerabilities consensus list, which is
compiled and updated by information-security authorities.
If you’re not keen on researching your potential vulnerabilities and can jump
right into testing, you have a couple of options:
/H12012Manual assessment: You can assess the potential vulnerabilities by con-
necting to the ports that are exposing the service or application andpoking around. You should manually assess certain vulnerabilities (suchas in Web applications). The vulnerability reports in the preceding data-bases often disclose how to do this — at least generally. If you have a lotof free time, performing these tests manually may be for you.
/H12012Automated assessment: If you’re like me, you’ll assess vulnerabilities
automatically when you can. Manual assessments are a great way tolearn, but people usually don’t have the time for most manual steps.
I love many of the available vulnerability-assessment tools. Some test for vulnerabilities on specific platforms (such as Windows and UNIX) andtypes of networks (either wired or wireless). They test for specific systemvulnerabilities — some even focus on the SANS Top 20 list. Versions of thesetools can map the business logic within an application; others can help soft-ware developers test for code flaws. The drawback to these tools is that theyfind only individual vulnerabilities, not correlating vulnerabilities. However,this is changing with the advent of event-correlation applications.
Many people love the Nessus tool (
www.nessus.org ). However, it’s not best
for beginners or without a Linux or UNIX server.One of my favorite ethical hacking weapons is a vulnerability-assessment tool
called QualysGuard by Qualys (
www.qualys.com ). It’s both a port scanner
and vulnerability-assessment tool. You don’t even need a computer to run it.
QualysGuard — which has its roots in Nessus — is an application service
provider-based commercial tool. Just browse to the Qualys Web site, log in,and enter the IP address of the systems you want to test. You schedule theassessment; it runs, then generates excellent reports, such as these:
/H12012An executive report containing information like the partial screencapture of a QualysGuard report shown in Figure 4-4.
/H12012A technical report of detailed explanations of the vulnerabilities andspecific countermeasures.
Like most good security tools, you pay for QualysGuard — it’s not the leastexpensive tool — but you get what you pay for. Some newer products offersimilar technical capabilities while adding convenience.50 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 50
--- Page 74 ---
Assessing vulnerabilities with a tool such as QualysGuard requires follow-up
expertise. Study the reports to base your recommendations on the testedsystems. 
Penetrating the System
You can use identified critical security holes to do the following:
/H12012Gain further information about the host and its data.
/H12012Start or stop certain services or applications.
/H12012Access other systems.
/H12012Disable logging or other security controls.
/H12012Capture screen shots.
/H12012Install such hacker tools as rootkits (hacker programs that masquerade
as legitimate OS programs) and network analyzers for later backdoorentry.
/H12012Capture keystrokes.
/H12012Send an e-mail as the administrator.
/H12012Perform a buffer-overflow attack.
/H12012Launch another type of DoS attack.
/H12012Upload a file proving your victory.
Figure 4-4:
A sample
QualysGuard
vulnera bility-
assessment
report.51 Chapter 4: Hacking Methodology07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 51
--- Page 75 ---
You can exploit the vulnerabilities on your systems and go for complete
system penetration. Ideally, you’ve already made your decision on this. Youmay want to leave well enough alone. There are also tasks you can’t do —such as installing rootkits or planting a file — unless you try.
Leave the more-intrusive penetration to those with more time on their hands.
Focus on correcting problems. Part VI of this book covers reporting, patching,and managing.
Don’t take the steps I outline in this chapter too literally. General ethical
hacking methodologies can be either too simplistic or too rigid. Ultimately,you are in control and can decide what to do and when to do it.52 Part I: Building the Foundation for Ethical Hacking 07 55784x Ch04.qxd  3/29/04  4:16 PM  Page 52
--- Page 76 ---
Part II
Putting Ethical
Hacking in Motion08 55784X PP02.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 53
--- Page 77 ---
In this part . . .
Let the games begin! You’ve waited long enough —
now’s the time to start testing your systems. But
where do you start? How about with your two Ps — your
people and your physical systems? These are, after all,two of the most easily and commonly attacked targets inyour organization.
This part starts out with a discussion of hacking people.
It then goes on to take a look at physical security vulnera-bilities. Of course, I’d be remiss in a part about people if Iskipped passwords, so I cover testing those as well. Thisis a great way to get the ball rolling to warm you up for themore speciﬁc hacks that come later in the book.08 55784X PP02.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 54
--- Page 78 ---
Chapter 5
Social Engineering
In This Chapter
/H17075Introducing social engineering
/H17075Examining the ramifications of social engineering
/H17075Understanding social-engineering techniques
/H17075Protecting your organization against social engineering
Social engineering takes advantage of the weakest link in any organiza-
tion’s information-security defenses: the employees. Social engineering is
“people hacking” and involves maliciously exploiting the trusting nature of
human beings for information that can be used for personal gain.
Social Engineering 101
Typically, hackers pose as someone else to gain information they otherwisecan’t access. Hackers then take the information obtained from their victimsand wreak havoc on network resources, steal or delete files, and even commitindustrial espionage or some other form of fraud against the organizationthey’re attacking. Social engineering is different from physical-security issues,
such as shoulder surfing and dumpster diving, but they are related.
Here are some examples of social engineering:
/H12012False support personnel claim that they need to install a patch or new
version of software on a user’s computer, talk the user into downloading
the software, and obtain remote control of the system.
/H12012False vendors claim to need to make updates to the organization’s
accounting package or phone system, ask for the administrator pass-word, and obtain full access.
/H12012False contest Web sites run by hackers gather user IDs and passwords
of unsuspecting contestants. The hackers then try those passwords onother Web sites, such as Yahoo! and Amazon.com, and steal personal orcorporate information.09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 55
--- Page 79 ---
/H12012False employees notify the security desk that they have lost their keys
to the computer room, are given a set of keys, and obtain unauthorized
access to physical and electronic information.
Sometimes, social engineers act as forceful and knowledgeable employees,such as managers or executives. Other times, they may play the roles ofextremely uninformed or naïve employees. They often switch from one modeto the other, depending on whom they are speaking to.
Effective information security — especially for fighting social engineering —
begins and ends with your users. Other chapters in this book provide greattechnical advice, but never forget that basic human communication andinteraction also affect the level of security. The candy-security adage is “Hard
crunchy outside, soft chewy inside.” The hard crunchy outside is the layer of
mechanisms — such as firewalls, intrusion-detection systems, and encryp-tion — that organizations rely on to secure their information. The soft chewy
inside is the people and the systems inside the organization. If hackers can
get past the thick outer layer, they can compromise the (mostly) defenselessinner layer.
Social engineering is one of the toughest hacks, because it takes great skill to
come across as trustworthy to a stranger. It’s also by far the toughest hackto protect against because people are involved. In this chapter, I explore theramifications of social engineering, techniques for your own ethical hackingefforts, and specific countermeasures to take against social engineering.
Before You Start
I approach the ethical hacking methodologies in this chapter differently thanin subsequent hacking chapters. Social engineering is an art and a science. Ittakes great skill to perform social engineering as an ethical hacker and isdependent upon your personality and overall knowledge of the organizationyou’re testing. If social engineering isn’t natural for you, consider using theinformation in this chapter for educational purposes — at first — until youhave more time to study the subject.
You can use the information in this chapter to perform specific tests or improve
information-security awareness in your organization. Social engineering canharm people’s jobs and reputations, and confidential information could beleaked. Proceed with caution and think before you act.
You can perform social-engineering attacks millions of ways. For this reason,
and because it’s next to impossible to train specific behaviors in one chapter,I don’t provide how-to instructions on carrying out social-engineering attacks.
Instead, I describe specific social-engineering scenarios that have worked forother hackers — both ethical and unethical. You can tailor these same tricksand techniques to specific situations.56 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 56
--- Page 80 ---
57 Chapter 5: Social Engineering
A case study in social engineering
with Ira Winkler
In this case study, Ira Winkler, a world-renowned
social engineer, was gracious in sharing withme an interesting study in social engineering.
The SituationMr. Winkler’s client wanted a general tempera-
ture of the organization’s security awarenesslevel. He and his accomplice went for the pot ofgold and tested the organization’s susceptibilityto social engineering. Getting started, theyscoped out the main entrance of the client’sbuilding and found that the reception/securitydesk was in the middle of a large lobby and wasstaffed by a receptionist. The next day, the twomen walked into the building during the morn-ing rush while pretending to talk on cell phones.They stayed at least 15 feet from the attendantand simply ignored her as they walked by.
After they were inside the facility, they found a
conference room to set up shop. They sat downto plan the rest of the day and decided a facilitybadge would be a great start. Mr. Winkler calledthe main information number and asked for theoffice that makes the badges. He was forwardedto the reception/security desk. He then pre-tended to be the CIO and told the person onthe other end of the line that he wanted badgesfor a couple of subcontractors. The personresponded, “Send the subcontractors down tothe main lobby.”
When Mr. Winkler and his accomplice arrived,
a uniformed guard asked what they were work-ing on, and they mentioned computers. Theguard then asked them if they needed access tothe computer room! Of course they said, “Thatwould help.” Within minutes, they both hadbadges with access to all office areas and thecomputer operations center. They went to thebasement and used their badges to open themain computer room door. They walked right inand were able to access a Windows server,load the user administration tool, add a newuser to the domain, and make the user amember of the administrators’ group. Then theyquickly left. 
The two men had access to the entire corporate
network with administrative rights within twohours! They also used the badges to performafter-hours walkthroughs of the building. Indoing this, they found the key to the CEO’s officeand planted a mock bug there. 
The OutcomeNobody outside the team knew what the two
men did until they were told after the fact. Afterthe employees were informed, the guard super-visor called Mr. Winkler and wanted to knowwho issued the badges. Mr. Winkler informedhim that the fact that his area didn’t know whoissued the badges was a problem in and ofitself, and that he does not disclose that infor-mation.
How This Could Have Been PreventedAccording to Mr. Winkler, the security desk
should have been located closer to the entrance,and the company should have had a formalprocess for issuing badges. In addition, accessto special areas like the computer room shouldrequire approval from a known entity. Afteraccess is granted, a confirmation should besent to the approver. Also, the server screenshould have been locked, the account shouldnot have been logged on unattended, and anyaddition of an administrator-level account shouldbe audited and appropriate parties should bealerted.
Ira Winkler, CISSP , CISM, is considered one of
the world’s best social engineers. You can findmore of his case studies in his book Spies
Among Us (McGraw-Hill).09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 57
--- Page 81 ---
These social-engineering techniques may be best performed by an outsider
to the organization. If you’re performing these tests against your own organi-zation, you may have difficulties acting as an outsider if everyone knows you.This may not be a problem in larger organizations, but if you have a small,close-knit company, people usually are on to your antics.
You can outsource social-engineering testing to a trusted consulting firm or
even have a colleague perform the tests for you. The key word here is trusted .
If you’re involving someone else, you must get references, perform backgroundchecks, and have the testing approved by management in writing beforehand.I cover the topic of outsourcing ethical hacking in Chapter 19.
Why Hackers Use Social Engineering
Bad guys use social engineering to break into systems because they can. They
want someone to open the door to the organization so that they don’t have tobreak in and risk getting caught. Firewalls, access controls, and authentica tion
devices can’t stop a determined social engineer.
Most social engineers perform their attacks slowly, so they’re not so obvious
and don’t raise suspicion. The bad guys gather bits of information over timeand use the information to create a broader picture. Alternatively, some social-engineering attacks can be performed with a quick phone call or e-mail. Themethods used depend on the hacker’s style and abilities.
Social engineers know that many organizations don’t have formal data classi-
fication, access-control systems, incident-response plans, and security-awareness programs.
Social engineers know a lot about a lot of things — both inside and outside
their target organizations — because it helps them in their efforts. The moreinformation social engineers gain about organizations, the easier it is for themto pose as employees or other trusted insiders. Social engineers’ knowledgeand determination give them the upper hand over average employees whoare unaware of the value of the information social engineers are seeking.
Understanding the Implications
Most organizations have enemies that want to cause trouble through socialengineering. These enemies could be current or former employees seekingrevenge, competitors wanting a leg up, or basic hackers trying to prove theirskills.58 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 58
--- Page 82 ---
Regardless of who is causing the trouble, every organization is at risk. Larger
companies spread across several locations are often more vulnerable, butsmall companies also are attacked. Everyone from receptionists to securityguards to IT personnel are potential victims of social engineering. Help-deskand call-center employees are especially vulnerable because they are trainedto be helpful and forthcoming with information. Even the average untrainedend user is susceptible to attack.
Social engineering has serious consequences. Because the objective of social
engineering is to coerce someone for ill-gotten gains, anything is possible.Effective social engineers can obtain the following information:
/H12012User or administrator passwords
/H12012Security badges or keys to the building and even the computer room
/H12012Intellectual property such as design specifications, formulae, or otherresearch and development documentation
/H12012Confidential financial reports
/H12012Private and confidential employee information
/H12012Customer lists and sales prospects
If any of the preceding information is leaked out, it can cause financial losses,lower employee morale, jeopardize customer loyalty, and even create legalissues. The possibilities are endless.
One reason protecting against social-engineering attacks is difficult is that they
aren’t well documented. Because so many possible methods exist, recoveryand protection are difficult after the attack. The hard crunchy outside created by
firewalls and intrusion-detection systems often creates a false sense of security,making the problem even worse.
With social engineering, you never know the next method of attack. The best
you can do is remain vigilant, understand the social engineer’s methodology,and protect against the most common attacks. In the rest of this chapter, Idiscuss how you can do this.
Performing Social-Engineering Attacks
The process of social engineering is actually pretty basic. In general, socialengineers find the details of organizational processes and information systemsto perform their attacks. With this information, they know what to pursue.Hackers typically perform social-engineering attacks in four simple steps:59 Chapter 5: Social Engineering09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 59
--- Page 83 ---
1. Perform research.
2. Build trust.3. Exploit relationship for information through words, actions, or 
technology.
4. Use the information gathered for malicious purposes.
These steps can include myriad substeps and techniques, depending on the
attack being performed.
Before social engineers perform their attacks, they need a goal in mind. This
is the hacker’s first step in this process, and this goal is most likely alreadyimplanted in the hacker’s mind. What does the hacker want to accomplish?What is the hacker trying to hack? Does he want intellectual property, serverpasswords, or security badges; or does he simply want to prove that thecompany’s defenses can be penetrated? In your efforts as an ethical hackerperforming social engineering, determine this goal before you move forward.
Fishing for information
Social engineers typically start by gathering public information about theirvictim. Many social engineers acquire information slowly over time so theydon’t raise suspicion. Obviousness is a tip-off when defending against socialengineering. I cover other warning signs throughout the rest of this chapter.
Regardless of the initial research method, all a hacker needs to start penetrat-
ing an organization is an employee list, a few key internal phone numbers, ora company calendar.
Using the Internet
Today’s basic research medium is the Internet. A few minutes on Google orother search engines, using simple key words such as the company name orspecific employees’ names, often produces a lot of information. You can findeven more information in SEC filings at 
www.sec.gov and at sites such as
www.hoovers.com and finance.yahoo.com . In fact, many organizations —
especially upper management — would be dismayed by what’s available. Byusing this search-engine information and browsing the company’s Web site,the hacker often has enough information to start.
Hackers can pay $100 or less for a comprehensive background check on indi-
viduals. These searches can turn up practically any public — and sometimesprivate — information about a person in minutes.60 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 60
--- Page 84 ---
Dumpster diving
Dumpster diving is a more difficult method of obtaining information. This
method is literally going through trash cans for information about a company.
Dumpster diving can turn up even the most confidential information, because
many employees think that their information is safe after it goes into file 13.Most people don’t think about the potential value of paper they throw away.These documents often contain a wealth of information that tips off the socialengineer with information needed to penetrate the organization further. Theastute social engineer looks for the following printed documents:
/H12012Internal phone lists
/H12012Organizational charts
/H12012Employee handbooks, which often contain security policies
/H12012Network diagrams
/H12012Password lists
/H12012Meeting notes
/H12012Spreadsheets and reports
/H12012E-mails containing confidential information
Shredding is effective if the paper is cross-shredded into tiny pieces of con-
fetti. Inexpensive shredders that shred documents only in long strips arebasically worthless against a determined social engineer. With a little timeand tape, a social engineer can easily piece a document back together.
Hackers often gather confidential personal and business information from
others by listening in on conversations held in restaurants, coffee shops, andairports. People who speak loudly when talking on a cell phone are a greatsource. Poetic justice, perhaps? While writing in public places, it’s amazingwhat I’ve heard others divulge — and I wasn’t trying to listen!
Hackers also look for floppy disks, CD-ROM and DVD discs, old computer
cases (especially with hard drives) and backup tapes.
See Chapter 6 for more on trash and other physical-security issues, including
countermeasures against these exploits.
Phone systems
Hackers can obtain information by using the dial-by-name feature built intomost voice-mail systems. To access this feature, you usually just press 061 Chapter 5: Social Engineering09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 61
--- Page 85 ---
when calling into the company’s main number or even someone’s desk. This
trick works best after hours to make sure that no one answers.
Hackers can protect their identifies if they can hide where they’re calling
from. Here are some ways that they can do that:
/H12012Residential phones sometimes can hide their numbers from caller ID.
The code to hide a residential phone number from a caller ID is *67. Justdial *67 before the number; it blocks the source number.
This feature is usually disabled when you’re calling toll-free (800, 888, 877)
numbers.
/H12012Business phones are more difficult to spoof from an office by using a
phone switch. However, all the hacker usually needs is the user guideand administrator password for the phone-switch software. In manyswitches, the hacker can enter the source number — including a falsifiednumber, such as the victim’s home phone number.
Hackers find interesting bits of information, such as when their victims are outof town, just by listening to voice-mail messages. They even study victims’voices by listening to their voice-mail messages or Internet presentations andWebcasts to impersonate those people.
Building trust
Trust — so hard to gain, so easy to lose. Trust is the essence of social engi-neering. Most humans trust other humans until a situation occurs that forcesthem not to. We want to help one another, especially if trust can be built andthe request for help is reasonable. Most people want to be team players in theworkplace and don’t know what can happen if they divulge too much informa-tion to a “trusted” source. This is why social engineers can accomplish theirgoals. Of course, building deep trust often takes time. Crafty social engineersgain it within minutes or hours. How do they build trust?
/H12012Likability: Who can’t relate to a nice person? Everyone loves courtesy.
The friendlier the social engineer — without going overboard — thebetter his chances of getting what he wants. Social engineers often beginby establishing common interests. They often use information theygained in the research phase to determine what the victim likes and actas if they like those things as well. For instance, they can phone victimsor meet them in person and, based on information they’ve learned aboutthe person, start talking about local sports teams or how wonderful it isto be single again. A few low-key and well-articulated comments can bethe start of a nice new relationship.62 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 62
--- Page 86 ---
/H12012Believability: Of course, believability is based in part on the knowledge
that social engineers have and how likable they are. But social engineers
also use impersonation — perhaps posing as a new employee or fellowemployee that the victim hasn’t met. They may even pose as a vendorthat does business with the organization. They often modestly claimauthority to influence people. The most common social-engineering trickis to do something nice so that the victim feels obligated to be nice inreturn or to be a team player for the organization.
Exploiting the relationship
After social engineers obtain the trust of their unsuspecting victims, theycoax them into divulging more information than they should. Whammo —they can go in for the kill. They do this through face-to-face or electroniccommunications that victims feel comfortable with, or they use technologyto get victims to divulge information.
Deceit through words and actions
Wily social engineers can get inside information from their victims many ways.They are often articulate and focus on keeping their conversations movingwithout giving their victims much time to think about what they’re saying.However, if they’re careless or overly anxious during their social-engineeringattacks, the following tip-offs may give them away:
/H12012Acting overly friendly or eager
/H12012Mentioning names of prominent people within the organization
/H12012Bragging about authority within the organization
/H12012Threatening reprimands if requests aren’t honored
/H12012Acting nervous when questioned (pursing the lips and fidgeting — especially the hands and feet, because more conscious effort is requiredto control body parts that are farther from the face)
/H12012Overemphasizing details
/H12012Physiological changes, such as dilated pupils or changes in voice pitch
/H12012Appearing rushed
/H12012Refusing to give information
/H12012Volunteering information and answering unasked questions 
/H12012Knowing information that an outsider should not have
/H12012A known outsider using insider speech or slang63 Chapter 5: Social Engineering09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 63
--- Page 87 ---
/H12012Asking strange questions
/H12012Misspelling words in written communications
A good social engineer isn’t obvious with the preceding actions, but these are
some of the signs that malicious behavior is in the works.
Hackers often do a favor for someone and then turn around and ask that person
if he or she would mind helping them. This is a common social-engineering
trick that works pretty well. Hackers also often use what’s called reverse socialengineering. This is where they offer help if a specific problem arises; sometime passes, the problem occurs (often by their doing), and then they help fixthe problem. They may come across as heroes, which can further their cause.Hackers also simply may ask an unsuspecting employee for a favor. Yes —they just outright ask for a favor. Many people fall for it.
Impersonating an employee is easy. Social engineers can wear a similar look-
ing uniform, make a fake ID badge, or simply dress like the real employees.They often pose as employees. People think, “Hey — he looks and acts likeme, so he must be one of us.” Social engineers also pretend to be employeescalling in from an outside phone line. This is an especially popular way ofexploiting help-desk and call-center personnel. Hackers know that it’s easyfor these people to fall into a rut due to such repetitive tasks as saying,“Hello, can I get your customer number, please?”
Here’s my story about how I was social-engineered because I didn’t think
before I spoke. One day, I was having trouble with my high-speed Internetconnection. I figured I could just use dial-up access, because it’s better thannothing for e-mail and other basic tasks. I contacted my ISP and told the tech-support guy I couldn’t remember my dial-up password. This sounds like thebeginning of a social-engineering stunt that I could’ve pulled off, but I got
taken. The slick tech-support guy paused for a minute, as if he was pulling upmy account info, and then asked, “What password did you try?”
Stupid me, I proceeded to mouth off all the passwords it could’ve been! The
phone got quiet for a moment. He reset my password and told me what itwas. After I hung up the phone, I thought, “What just happened? I just gotsocial-engineered!” Man, was I mad at myself. I changed all the passwordsthat I divulged in case he used that information against me. I still bet to thisday that he was just experimenting with me. Lesson learned: Never, ever,under any circumstances divulge your password to someone else.
Deceit through technology
Technology can make things easier — and more fun — for the social engineer.Often, the request comes from a computer or other electronic entity youthink you can identify. But spoofing a computer name, an e-mail address, a faxnumber, or a network address is easy. Fortunately, you can take a few counter-measures against this, as described in the next section.64 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 64
--- Page 88 ---
One way hackers deceive through technology is by sending e-mail for critical
information. Such e-mail usually provides a link that directs victims to a pro-fessional- and legitimate-looking Web site that “updates” such account infor-mation as user IDs, passwords, and Social Security numbers
Many spam messages use this trick. Most users are inundated with so much
spam and other unwanted e-mail that they often let their guard down and opene-mails and attachments that they shouldn’t open. These e-mails usually lookprofessional and believable. They often dupe people into disclosing informa-tion they should never give in exchange for a gift. These social-engineeringtricks also occur when a hacker who has already broken into the networksends messages or creates fake Internet pop-up windows. The same trickshave occurred through instant messaging and cell-phone messaging.
In some well-publicized incidents, hackers e-mailed to their victims a patch
purporting to come from Microsoft or another well-known vendor. Users thinkit looks like a duck and it quacks like a duck — but it’s not Bill this time! Themessage is from a hacker wanting the user to install the “patch” so a Trojan-horse keylogger can be installed or a backdoor can be created into computers
and networks. Hackers use these backdoors to hack into the organization’ssystems or use the victims’ computers (known as zombies ) as launching pads
to attack another system. Even viruses or worms use social engineering. Forinstance, the LoveBug worm told users they had a secret admirer. When thevictims opened the e-mail, it was too late. Their computers were infected;perhaps worse, they didn’t have a secret admirer.
The Nigerian 419 e-mail fraud scheme attempts to access unsuspecting
people’s bank accounts and money. These social engineers — scamsters —
offer to transfer millions of dollars to the victim to repatriate a deceasedclient’s funds to the United States. All the victim must provide is personalbank-account information and a little money up front to cover the transferexpenses. Victims have ended up having their bank accounts emptied.
Many computerized social-engineering tactics can be performed anonymously
through Internet proxy servers, anonymizers, and remailers. When people fallfor requests for confidential personal or corporate information, the sourcesof these social-engineering attacks are often impossible to track.
Social-Engineering Countermeasures
You have only a few good lines of defense against social engineering. Even withstrong security systems, a naïve or untrained user can let the social engineerinto the network. Never underestimate the power of social engineers.65 Chapter 5: Social Engineering09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 65
--- Page 89 ---
Policies
Specific policies help ward off social engineering long-term in these areas:
/H12012Classifying data
/H12012Hiring employees and contractors and setting up user IDs
/H12012Terminating employees and contractors, and removing user IDs
/H12012Setting and resetting passwords
/H12012Handling proprietary and confidential information
/H12012Escorting guests
These policies must be enforceable and enforced — for everyone within the
organization. Keep them up to date and tell your end users about them.
User awareness
The best line of defense against social engineering is an organization withemployees who can identify and respond to social-engineering attacks. Userawareness begins with initial training for everyone and follows with security-awareness initiatives to keep social-engineering defenses on everyone’s mind.Align training and awareness with specific security policies.
Consider outsourcing security training to a seasoned security trainer.
Employees often take training more seriously if it comes from an outsider.Outsourcing security training is worth the investment.
As you approach ongoing user training and awareness in your organization,
the following tips help you combat social-engineering long term:
/H12012Treat security awareness and training as a business investment.
/H12012Train users on an ongoing basis to keep security fresh in their minds.
/H12012Tailor your training content to your audience whenever possible.
/H12012Create a social-engineering awareness program for your business func-tions and user roles.
/H12012Keep your messages as nontechnical as possible.
/H12012Develop incentive programs for preventing and reporting incidents.
/H12012Lead by example.66 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 66
--- Page 90 ---
Share these tips with your users to help prevent social-engineering attacks:
/H12012Never divulge any information unless you can validate that the person
requesting the information needs it and is who he says he is. If a requestis made over the telephone, verify the caller’s identity, and call back.
/H12012Never click an e-mail link that supposedly loads a page with informationthat needs updating. This is especially true for unsolicited e-mails.
/H12012Escort all guests within a building.
/H12012Never send or open files from strangers.
/H12012Never give out passwords.
A few other general suggestions can ward off social engineering:
/H12012Never let a stranger connect to one of your network jacks — even for afew seconds. A hacker can place a network analyzer, Trojan-horse pro-gram, or other malware directly onto your network.
/H12012Classify your information assets, both hard-copy and electronic. Trainall employees to handle each asset type.
/H12012Develop and enforce computer media and document destruction policiesthat help ensure data is handled carefully and stays where it should.
/H12012Use cross-shredding paper shredders. Better, hire a document-shreddingcompany that specializes in confidential document destruction.
/H12012Never allow anonymous File Transfer Protocol (FTP) access into yourFTP servers if you don’t have to.
These techniques can reinforce the content of formal training:
/H12012New-employee orientation, lunch ’n’ learns, e-mails, and newsletters
/H12012Social-engineering survival brochure with tips and FAQs
/H12012Trinkets, such as screen savers, mouse pads, sticky notes, pens, andoffice posters
Appendix A lists my favorite user-awareness trinket vendors to improve
user awareness in your organization.67 Chapter 5: Social Engineering09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 67
--- Page 91 ---
68 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 09 55784x Ch05.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 68
--- Page 92 ---
Chapter 6
Physical Security
In This Chapter
/H17075Understanding the importance of physical security
/H17075Q&A with a well-known physical-security expert
/H17075Looking for physical-security vulnerabilities
/H17075Implementing countermeasures for physical-security attacks
I’m a strong believer that information security is more dependent on non-
technical policies, processes, and procedures than on the technical 
hardware and software solutions that many people swear by. Physical security — protection of physical property — encompasses both technical and
nontechnical components.
Physical security is an often overlooked aspect of an information-security
program. Physical security is a critical component of information security.Your ability to secure your information depends on your ability to secureyour site physically. In this chapter, I cover some common physical-securityweaknesses, as they relate to computers and information security, to look forin your own systems. In addition, I outline free and low-cost countermeasuresto minimize your vulnerabilities. I don’t recommend breaking and entering,which is required for some physical-security tests. Instead, approach sensi-tive areas to see how far you canget. Take a fresh look — from an outsider’s
perspective — at the physical vulnerabilities I cover in this chapter. You maydiscover holes in your physical-security infrastructure.
Physical-Security Vulnerabilities
Whatever your computer and network-security technology, practically anyhack is possible if a hacker is in your building or computer room. That’s whyit’s important to look for physical-security vulnerabilities.10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 69
--- Page 93 ---
In small companies, some physical-security issues may not be a problem.
Many physical security vulnerabilities depend on factors like the following:
/H12012Size of the building
/H12012Number of buildings or sites
/H12012Number of employees
/H12012Location and number of building entrance/exit points
/H12012Placement of the computer room(s) and other confidential information
Literally thousands of possible physical-security vulnerabilities exist. Thebad guys are always on the lookout for them — so you should find these vul-nerabilities first. Here are some common physical-security vulnerabilities I’vefound when assessing security:
/H12012No receptionist in a building
/H12012No visitor sign-in or escort required for building access
/H12012Employees trusting visitors just because they’re wearing vendor uni-forms or say they’re there to work on the copier or computers
/H12012No access controls on doors
/H12012Doors propped open
/H12012Publicly accessible computer rooms
/H12012Backup media lying around
/H12012Unsecured computer hardware and software media
/H12012CDs and floppy disks with confidential information in trash cans
When these physical-security vulnerabilities are exploited, bad things canhappen. Perhaps the biggest problem is that unauthorized people can enteryour building. After intruders are in your building, they can wander the halls;log onto computers; rummage through the trash; and steal hard-copy docu-ments, floppy disks and CDs, and even computers out of offices.
What to Look For
You should look for specific security vulnerabilities. Many potential physical-security exploits seem unlikely, but they happen to organizations that don’ttake physical security seriously.
Hackers can exploit many physical-security vulnerabilities, including weak-
nesses in a building’s infrastructure, office layout, computer-room access,and design. In addition to these factors, consider the facility’s proximity to70 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 70
--- Page 94 ---
local emergency assistance (police, fire, and ambulance) and the area’s crime
statistics (burglary, breaking and entering, and so on) so you can better under-stand what you’re up against.71 Chapter 6: Physical Security
A Q&A on physical security with Jack Wiles
In this Q&A session, Jack Wiles, an information-security pioneer with over 30 years of experi-ence, answered several questions on physicalsecurity and how a lack of it often leads to infor-mation insecurity.
How important do you think physical security
is in relation to technical-security issues?
I’ve been asked that question many times in the
past, and from decades of experience with bothphysical and technical security, I have a stan-dard answer. Without question, many of themost expensive technical-security counter-measures and tools become worthless whenphysical security is weak. If I can get my teaminto your building(s) and walk up to someone’sdesk and log in as that person, I have bypassedall your technical-security systems. In pastsecurity assessments, after my team and Ientered a building, we always found that peoplesimply thought that we belonged there — thatwe were employees. We were always friendlyand helpful when we came in contact with realemployees. They would often return the kind-ness by helping us with whatever we asked for.
How were you able to get into most of the
buildings when you conducted “red team” pen-etration tests for companies?
In many cases, we just boldly walked into the
building and went up the elevator in multistorybuildings. If we were challenged, we alwayshad a story ready. Our typical story was that wethought that this was the HR department, andwe were there to apply for a job. If we werestopped at the door and told which building togo to for HR, we simply left and then looked forother entrances to that same building. If wefound an outside smoking area at a differentdoor, we attempted tailgating and simply walked
in behind other employees who were reenter-ing the building after finishing their breaks.Tailgating also worked at most entrances thatrequired card access. In my career as a red-team leader, we were never stopped and ques-tioned. We simply said, “Thank you” as wewalked in and compromised the entire building.
What kinds of things would you bring out of a
building?
It was always easy to get enough important
documentation to prove that we were there. Inmany cases, the documentation was sitting in abox next to someone’s desk (especially if thatperson was someone important) marked RECY-CLE. To us, that really said, “Steal me first”! Wefound it interesting that many companies just lettheir recycle boxes fill up before emptying them.We would also look for a room where strip-cutshredders were used. The documents that wereshredded were usually stored in clear plasticbags. We loaded these bags into our cars andhad many of the shredded documents put backtogether in a few hours. We found that if wepasted the strips from any page on cardboardwith as much as an inch of space between thestrips, the final document was still readable.
Jack Wiles is president of TheTrainingCo.
and promotes the annual information-
security conference Techno Security (
www.
thetrainingco.com ).10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 71
--- Page 95 ---
The following sections list vulnerabilities to look for when assessing your orga-
nization’s physical security. This won’t take a lot of technical savvy or expen-sive equipment. Depending on the size of your facilities, these tests shouldn’ttake much time. The bottom line is to determine whether the physical-secu rity
systems are adequate for the risks involved. Above all, be practical and usecommon sense.
Building infrastructure
Doors, windows, and walls are critical components of a building — especiallyin a computer room or in an area where confidential information is stored.
Attack points
Hackers can exploit a handful of building-infrastructure vulnerabilities.Consider the following attack points, which are commonly overlooked:
/H12012Are doors propped open? If so, why?
/H12012Can gaps at the bottom of critical doors allow someone using a balloonor other device to trip a sensor on the inside of a “secure” room?
/H12012Would it be easy to force doors open? Would a simple kick near thedoorknob suffice?
/H12012What is the building and/or computer room made of (steel, wood, con-crete), and how sturdy are the walls and entryways? How resilient wouldthe material be to earthquakes, tornadoes, strong winds, heavy rains,and vehicles driving into the building?
/H12012Are any doors or windows made of glass? Is this glass clear? Is the glassshatterproof or bulletproof?
/H12012Are doors, windows, and other entry points wired to an alarm system?
/H12012Are there drop ceilings with tiles that can be pushed up? Are the walls
slab-to-slab? If not, hackers can easily scale walls, bypassing any door orwindow access controls.
Countermeasures
Many physical-security countermeasures for building vulnerabilities mayrequire other maintenance, construction, or operations experts. If buildinginfrastructures is not your forte, you can hire outside experts during thedesign, assessment, and retrofitting stages to ensure that you have adequatecontrols. Here are some of the best ways to solidify building security:
/H12012Strong doors and locks
/H12012Windowless walls around computer rooms72 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 72
--- Page 96 ---
/H12012An alarm system that’s connected to all access points and continuously
monitored
/H12012Lighting (especially around entry/exit points)
/H12012Mantraps that allow only person at a time to pass through a door
/H12012Fences (barbed wire and razor wire)
Utilities
You must consider building and computer-room utilities, such as power,water, and fire suppression, when accessing physical security. These utilitiescan help fight off such incidents as fire and keep other access controls run-ning during a power loss. They can also be used against you if an intruderenters the building.
Attack points
Hackers often exploit utility-related vulnerabilities. Consider the followingattack points, which are commonly overlooked:
/H12012Is power-protection equipment (surge protectors, UPSs, and generators)in place? How easily accessible are the on/off switches on these devices?Can an intruder walk in and flip a switch?
/H12012When the power fails, what happens to physical-security mechanisms?Do they fail open, allowing anyone through, or fail closed, keeping every-
one in or out until the power is restored?
/H12012Where are fire-detection and -suppression devices — including alarmsensors, extinguishers, and sprinkler systems — located? Determinehow a malicious intruder can abuse them. Are these devices placedwhere they can harm electronic equipment during a false alarm?
/H12012Where are water and gas shutoff valves located? Can you access them,or would you have to call maintenance personnel about an incident?
/H12012Are local telecom wires (both copper and fiber) that run outside of thebuilding located aboveground, where someone can tap into them withtelecom tools? Can digging in the area cut them easily? Are they locatedon telephone poles that are vulnerable to traffic accidents?
Countermeasures
You may need to involve other experts during the design, assessment, orretrofitting stages. The key is placement:
/H12012Where are the major utility controls placed?
/H12012Can a hacker or other miscreant walking through the building access thecontrols to turn them on and off?73 Chapter 6: Physical Security10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 73
--- Page 97 ---
Covers for on/off switches and thermostat controls and locks for server
power buttons and PCI expansion slots are effective defenses.
I once assessed the physical security of an Internet collocation facility for a
very large computer company (whose name will remain anonymous). I made itpast the front guard and tailgated through all the controlled doors to reach thedata center. After I was inside, I walked by such equipment as servers, routers,firewalls, UPSs, and power cords that were owned by very large dot-com com-panies. All this equipment was completely exposed to anyone walking in thatarea. A quick flip of a switch or an accidental trip over a network cable dan-gling to the floor could bring an entire shelf — and a global e-commerce site —to the ground.
Office layout and usage
Office design and usage can either help or hinder physical security.
Hackers may exploit some office vulnerabilities. Consider these attack points:
/H12012Does a receptionist or security guard monitor traffic in and out?
/H12012Do employees have confidential information on their desks? What about
mail and other packages — do they lie around outside someone’s dooror, even worse, outside the building, waiting for pickup?
/H12012Where are trash cans and dumpsters located? Are they easily accessibleby anyone? Are recycling bins or shredders used? Open recycling binsand other careless handling of trash are open invitations for dumpster
diving — in which hackers search for confidential company information
in phone lists and memos in the trash. Dumpster diving can lead tomany security exposures.
/H12012How secure are mail and copy rooms? If hackers can access theserooms, they can steal mail or company letterhead to use against you.
/H12012Are closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras used andmonitored?
/H12012What access controls are on doors and windows? Are regular keys, cardkeys, combination locks, or biometrics used? Who can access these keys,and where are they stored? Keys and programmable keypad combinationsare often shared among users, making accountability difficult to deter-
mine. Find out how many people share these combinations and keys.
Countermeasures
Simple measures can reduce your exposure to office vulnerabilities:74 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 74
--- Page 98 ---
/H12012A receptionist or a security guard who monitors people coming and going.
This is the most critical countermeasure. This person can ensure thatevery visitor signs in and that all new or untrusted visitors are alwaysescorted.
Make it policy and procedure for all employees to question strangers
and report strange behavior in the building.
Employees Only or Authorized Personnel Only signs show the bad guys
where they should go instead of deterring them from entering.
/H12012CCTV cameras.
/H12012Single entry/exit points to a building or computer room.
/H12012Secure areas for dumpsters.
/H12012Cross-cut shredders or secure recycling bins for hard-copy documents.
/H12012Limited numbers of keys and pass-code combinations.Make keys and pass codes unique for each person, whenever possible.
/H12012Biometrics identification systems can be very effective, but they can
also be expensive and difficult to manage.
Network components and computers
After hackers obtain physical access to a building, they look for the computerroom and other easily accessible computer and network devices.
Attack points
The keys to the kingdom are often as close as someone’s desktop computerand not much farther than an unsecured computer room or wiring closet.
Malicious intruders can do the following:
/H12012Obtain network access and send malicious e-mails as a logged-in user.
/H12012Steal files from the computer by copying them onto a floppy disk or USB
drive, or by e-mailing them to an external address.
/H12012Enter unlocked computer rooms and mess around with servers, firewalls,and routers.
/H12012Walk out with network diagrams, contact lists, and business-continuityand incident-response plans.
/H12012Obtain phone numbers from analog lines and circuit IDs from T1, frame-relay, and other telecom equipment for future attacks.75 Chapter 6: Physical Security10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 75
--- Page 99 ---
Practically every bit of unencrypted information that traverses the network
can be recorded for future analysis through one of the following methods:
/H12012Connecting a computer running network-analyzer software to a hub,monitor, or mirrored port on a switch on your network
/H12012Installing network-analyzer software on an existing computer.
This is very hard to spot.
How would hackers access this information in the future?
/H12012The easiest attack method is to either install remote-administration soft-
ware on the computer or dial into a modem by using VNC orpcAnywhere.
/H12012A crafty hacker with enough time can bind a public IP address to thecomputer if it’s outside the firewall. Hackers with enough networkknowledge can configure new firewall rules to do this.
Also consider these other vulnerabilities:
/H12012How easily can someone’s computer be accessed during regular hours?During lunchtime? After hours?
/H12012Are servers, firewalls, routers, and switches mounted in locked racks?
/H12012Are computers — especially laptops — secured to desks with locks?
/H12012Are passwords stored on sticky notes on computer screens, keyboards,or desks?
/H12012Are backup media lying around the computer room susceptible to theft?
/H12012Are media safes used to protect backup media? Who can access the safe?
/H12012How are laptops and hand-held computers handled in-house and whenemployees are working from home or traveling? Are personal digitalassistants (PDAs) and cell phones sitting around unsecured? Thesedevices are often at great risk because of their size and value. Also, theyare typically unprotected by the organization’s regular security controls.Are specific policies and technologies in place to help protect them? Islocking laptop bags and PDA cases required? What about power-on pass-words? Also consider encryption in case these devices get into ahacker’s hands.
/H12012How easily can someone access a wireless access point (AP) signal or the
AP itself to join the network?
/H12012Are network firewalls, routers, switches, and hubs (basically, anythingwith an Ethernet connection) easily accessible, which would enable ahacker to plug into the network easily?76 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 76
--- Page 100 ---
/H12012Are all cables patched through on the patch panel in the wiring closet so
all network drops are live?
This is very common but a bad idea.
/H12012Are cable traps/locks in place that prevent hackers from unplugging net-
work cables from patch panels or computers to use those connectionsfor their own computers?
Countermeasures
Network and computer security countermeasures are some of the simplest toimplement, yet the most difficult to enforce because they involve everydayactions. Here is a rundown of these countermeasures:
/H12012Require users to lock their screens — which usually takes a few clicks orkeystrokes in Windows or UNIX — to keep intruders out of their systems.
/H12012Ensure that strong passwords are used (as covered in Chapter 7).
/H12012Require laptop users to lock their systems to their desks with a lockingcable. This is especially important in larger companies or locations thatreceive a lot of foot traffic.
/H12012Keep computer rooms and wiring closets locked, and monitor thoseareas for malicious wrongdoings.
/H12012Keep a current inventory of hardware and software within the organiza-tion — especially in computer rooms — so it’s easy to determine whenextra equipment appears or other equipment is missing.
/H12012Properly secure computer media — such as floppy disks, CD-ROMs,tapes, and hard drives — when stored and during transport.
/H12012Use a bulk eraser on magnetic media before it’s discarded.77 Chapter 6: Physical Security10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 77
--- Page 101 ---
78 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 10 55784x Ch06.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 78
--- Page 102 ---
Chapter 7
Passwords
In This Chapter
/H17075Identifying password vulnerabilities
/H17075Examining password-hacking tools and techniques
/H17075Hacking operating-system passwords
/H17075Hacking password-protected files
/H17075Protecting your systems from password hacking
Password hacking is one of the easiest and most common ways hackers
obtain unauthorized computer or network access. Although strong pass-
words that are difficult to crack (or guess) are easy to create and maintain,
users often neglect this. Therefore, passwords are one of the weakest links inthe information-security chain. Passwords rely on secrecy. After a passwordis compromised, its original owner isn’t the only person who can access thesystem with it. That’s when bad things start happening.
Hackers have many ways to obtain passwords. They can glean passwords
simply by asking for them or by looking over the shoulders of users as theytype them in. Hackers can also obtain passwords from local computers byusing password-cracking software. To obtain passwords from across a net-work, hackers can use remote cracking utilities or network analyzers.
This chapter demonstrates just how easily hackers can gather password
information from your network. I outline common password vulnerabilitiesthat exist in computer networks and describe countermeasures to help pre-vent these vulnerabilities from being exploited on your systems.
If you perform the tests and implement the countermeasures outlined in this
chapter, you’re well on your way to securing your systems’ passwords.
Password Vulnerabilities
When you balance the cost of security and the value of the protected infor-mation, the combination of user ID and secret password is usually adequate.11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 79
--- Page 103 ---
However, passwords give a false sense of security. The bad guys know this
and attempt to crack passwords as a step toward breaking into computersystems.
One big problem with relying solely on passwords for information security is
that more than one person can know them. Sometimes, this is intentional;often, it’s not. You can’t know who has a password other than the owner.
Knowing a password doesn’t make someone an authorized user.Here are the two general classifications of password vulnerabilities:
/H12012Organizational or end-user vulnerabilities: This includes lack of pass-
word awareness on the part of end users and the lack of password poli-
cies that are enforced within the organization.
/H12012Technical vulnerabilities: This includes weak encryption methods and
insecure storage of passwords on computer systems.
Before computer networks and the Internet, the user’s physical environmentwas an additional layer of password security. Now that most computers havenetwork connectivity, that protection is gone.
Organizational password vulnerabilities
It’s human nature to want convenience. This makes passwords one of the eas-iest barriers for an attacker to overcome. Almost 3 trillion (yes, trillion with atand 12 zeros) eight-character password combinations are possible by using
the 26 letters of the alphabet and the numerals 0 through 9. However, mostpeople prefer to create passwords that are easy to remember. Users like touse such passwords as “password,” their login name, or a pet’s name.
Unless users are educated and reminded about using strong passwords, their
passwords usually are
/H12012Weak and easy to guess.
/H12012Seldom changed.
/H12012Reused for many security points. When bad guys crack a password, theytry to access other systems with the same password and user name.
/H12012Written down in nonsecure places. The more complex a password is, themore difficult it is to crack. However, when users create more complexpasswords, they’re more likely to write them down. Hackers can findthese passwords and use them against you.80 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 80
--- Page 104 ---
81 Chapter 7: Passwords
A case study in Windows password vulnerabilities
with Philippe Oechslin
In this case study, Dr. Philippe Oechslin, a
researcher and independent information secu-rity consultant, shared with me his recentresearch findings on Windows passwordvulnerabilities.
The SituationIn 2003, Dr. Oechslin discovered a new method
for cracking Windows passwords. While test-ing a brute-force password-cracking tool, hethought it was a waste of time for everyoneusing the same tool to have to generate thesame hashes over and over again. He believedthat generating a huge dictionary of all possiblehashes would make it easier to crack Windowspasswords, but then he quickly realized that adictionary of the LAN Manager (LM) hashes ofall possible alphanumerical passwords wouldrequire over a terabyte of storage.
During his research, Dr. Oechslin discovered a
technique called time-memory trade-offs,where hashes are computed in advance butonly a small fraction are stored (approximatelyone in a thousand). He discovered that how theLM hashes are organized allows you to find anypassword if you spend some time recalculatingsome of the hashes. This technique savesmemory but takes a lot of time. Studying thismethod, he found a way to make it more effi-cient, making it possible to find any of the 80 bil-lion unique hashes by using a table of 250 millionentries (1GB worth of data) and performing only4 million hash calculations. This process ismuch faster than a brute-force attack, whichmust generate 50 percent of the hashes (40 bil-lion) on average.
This research is based on the absence of a
random element when Windows passwords arehashed. This is true for both the LM hash andthe NT hash built into Windows. As a result, thesame password produces the same hash onany Windows machine. Although it is knownthat Windows hashes have no random element,no one has used a technique like the one thatDr. Oechslin discovered to crack Windowspasswords.
For a short time, Dr. Oechslin and his team had
an interactive tool on their Web site(
lasecwww.epfl.ch ) that enabled visitors to
submit hashes and have them cracked. Over asix-day period, the tool cracked 1,845 pass-words in an average of 7.7 seconds! They deac-tivated the demo after a week (and a million hits)and did not release the tool because they didn’twant to help hackers. Dr. Oechslin did say thathe has heard about other tools (such asRainbowCrack) that use the same method butare being developed independently.
The OutcomeSo what’s the big deal, you say? This password-
cracking method can crack any alphanumericalpassword in a few seconds, whereas currentbrute-force tools can take several hours. Dr.Oechslin and his research team have generateda table with which they can crack any pass-word made of letters, numbers, and 16 othercharacters in less than a minute, demonstratingthat passwords made up of letters and numbersaren’t good enough. He also stated that thismethod is useful for ethical hackers who haveonly limited time to perform their testing.Unfortunately, hackers have the same benefitand can perform their attacks before anyonedetects them!
Philippe Oechslin, PhD, CISSP , is a lecturer and
senior research assistant at the Swiss FederalInstitute of Technology in Lausanne and spendshis spare time as an independent information-security consultant.11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 81
--- Page 105 ---
Technical password vulnerabilities
You can often find these serious technical vulnerabilities after exploiting
organizational password vulnerabilities:
/H12012Weak password-encryption schemes. Hackers can break weak passwordstorage mechanisms by using cracking methods that I outline in thischapter. Many vendors and developers believe that passwords are safefrom hackers if they don’t publish the source code for their encryptionalgorithms. Wrong! A persistent, patient hacker can usually crack this
security by obscurity fairly quickly. After the code is cracked, it is soon
distributed across the Internet and becomes public knowledge.
Password-cracking utilities take advantage of weak password encryption.
These utilities do the grunt work and can crack any password, givenenough time and computing power.
/H12012Software that stores passwords in memory and easily accessed databases.
/H12012End-user applications that display passwords on the screen while typing.
The ICAT Metabase (an index of computer vulnerabilities) currently identifiesover 460 technical password vulnerabilities, 230 of which are labeled as high-severity. You can search for some of these issues at 
icat.nist.gov/icat.
cfm to find out how vulnerable some of your systems are from a technical
perspective.
Cracking Passwords
Password cracking is one of the most enjoyable hacks for the bad guys. It fuelstheir sense of exploration and desire to figure things out. You may not havea burning desire to explore everyone’s passwords, but it helps to approachpassword cracking with this thinking. So where should you start hacking thepasswords on your systems? Generally speaking, any user’s password works.After you obtain one password, you can obtain others — including adminis-trator or root passwords.
Administrator passwords are the pot of gold. With unauthorized administrative
access, you can do virtually anything on the system. When looking for yourorganization’s password vulnerabilities, I recommend first trying to obtainthe highest level of access possible (such as administrator) through the mostdiscreet method possible. That’s what the hackers do.
You can use low-tech ways and high-tech ways to exploit the vulnerabilities and
obtain passwords. For example, you can deceive users into divulging pass-words over the telephone or simply observe what a user has written down ona piece of paper. Or you can capture passwords directly from a computer orover a network or the Internet with tools covered in the following sections.82 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 82
--- Page 106 ---
Cracking passwords the old-fashioned way
A hacker can use low-tech methods to crack passwords. These methods
include using social-engineering techniques, shoulder surfing, and simplyguessing passwords from information that you know about the user.
Social engineering
The most popular low-tech method is social engineering, which is covered in
detail in Chapter 5. Social engineering takes advantage of the trusting natureof human beings to gain information that can later be used maliciously.
Techniques
To obtain a password through social engineering, you just ask for it. Forexample, you can simply call a user and tell him that he has some important-looking e-mails stuck in the mail queue and you need his password to log inand free them up. This is how hackers try to get the information!
If your colleague gives you his password, make sure that he changes it.
Countermeasures
User awareness is the best defense against social engineering. Train users 
to spot attacks (such as suspicious phone calls or deceitful e-mails) andrespond effectively. Their best response is to not give out any informationand to alert the appropriate information-security officer in the organizationto see whether the inquiry is legitimate and whether a response is necessary.For this defense to be successful, the organization must enforce a securitypolicy and provide ongoing security-awareness training to users.
Shoulder surfing
Shoulder surfing is an effective, low-tech password hack.
Techniques
To mount this attack, you must be near the user and not look obvious. Simplywatch either the user’s keyboard or screen when logging in.
A hacker with a good eye may watch whether the user is glancing around his
desk for either a reminder of the password or the password itself.
Many folks have experienced shoulder surfing at the grocery-store checkout
line. You swipe your debit card to pay for your chips and dip; you enter yourPIN to authorize the transaction; and before you know it, the guy in linebehind you has your PIN! He simply watched you enter it into the keypad.
You can try shoulder surfing yourself — though preferably not in the grocery-
store checkout line. Just walk around the office and perform random spotchecks. Go to users’ desks, and ask them to log in to their computers, the83 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 83
--- Page 107 ---
network, or even their e-mail applications. Just don’t tell them what you’re
doing beforehand, or they’ll be on to you and attempt to hide what they’retyping or where they’re looking for their password — two things that theyshould’ve been doing all along!
Countermeasures
Encourage users to be aware of their surroundings and not enter their pass-words when they suspect that someone is looking over their shoulder.Instruct users that if they suspect someone is looking over their shoulderwhile they’re logging in, they should politely ask the person to look away.
Inference
Inference is simply guessing passwords from information you know about
users — such as their date of birth, favorite television show, and phone num-bers. It sounds silly, but you can determine passwords by guessing!
The best defense against an inference hack attack is to educate users about
creating secure passwords that do not include information that can be asso-ciated with them. You can’t easily enforce this practice with technical con-trols, so you need a sound security policy and ongoing awareness training toremind users of the importance of secure password creation.
Weak authentication
Hackers can obtain — or simply avoid having to use — passwords by takingadvantage of older operating systems, such as Windows 9 xand Me. These
operating systems don’t require passwords to log in.
Bypassing authentication
On a Windows 9 xor similar workstation that’s prompting for a password, you
can press Esc on the keyboard to get right in. After you’re in, you can findother passwords stored in such places as dial-up networking connectionsand screen savers. These weak systems can serve as trusted machines —
meaning that it’s assumed that they’re secure — and provide good launchingpads for network-based password attacks as well.
Countermeasures
The only true defense against this hack is to not use operating systems thatemploy weak authentication. To eliminate this vulnerability, upgrade toWindows XP, or use Linux or the flavors of UNIX, including Mac OS X.
More modern authentication systems (such as Kerberos, which is used in
newer versions of Windows), directory services (such as Novell’s eDirectory),
and network-based e-mail systems (such as Exchange) encrypt user passwordsor don’t communicate the passwords across the network. These measurescreate an extra layer of security, but these authentication systems still havesome vulnerabilities, which I discuss shortly.84 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 84
--- Page 108 ---
High-tech password cracking
High-tech password cracking involves using a program that tries to guess a
password by determining all possible password combinations. These high-tech methods are mostly automated after you access the computer and pass-word database files.
Password cracking software
You can try to crack your organization’s operating-system and Internet-application passwords with various password cracking tools:
/H12012LC4 (previously called L0phtcrack) can sniff out password hashes fromthe wire. Go to 
www.atstake.com/research/lc
/H12012NetBIOS Auditing Tool (NAT) specializes in network-based passwordattacks. Go to 
www.securityfocus.com/tools/543
/H12012Chknull (www.phreak.org/archives/exploits/novell ) for Novell
NetWare password testing
/H12012These tools require physical access on the tested computer:
• John the Ripper ( www.openwall.com/john )
• pwdump2 ( razor.bindview.com/tools/desc/pwdump2_
readme.html )
• Crack (coast.cs.purdue.edu/pub/tools/unix/pwdutils/
crack )
• Brutus ( www.hoobie.net/brutus )
• Pandora ( www.nmrc.org/project/pandora )
• NTFSDOS Professional ( www.winternals.com )
/H12012Various other handy password tools exist, such as
• GetPass for decrypting login passwords for Cisco routers ( www.
boson.com/promo/utilities/getpass/getpass_utility.htm )
• Win Sniffer for capturing FTP, e-mail, and other types of passwords
off the network
• Cain and Abel for capturing, cracking, and even calculating various
types of passwords on a plethora of systems ( www.oxid.it/
cain.html )
You may be wondering what value a password-cracking tool offers if you needphysical access to your systems to test them. Some would say that if a hackercan obtain physical access to your systems and password files, you havemore than just basic information-security problems to worry about. But thiskind of access is entirely possible! What about a summer intern, a disgruntledemployee, or an outside consultant with malicious intent?85 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 85
--- Page 109 ---
Password-cracking utilities take a set of known passwords and run them
through a password-hashing algorithm. The resulting hashes — or anencrypted form of a data set — are then compared at lightning speed to thepassword hashes extracted from the original password database. When amatch is found between the newly generated hash and the hash in the origi-nal database, the password has been cracked. It’s that simple.
Other password-cracking programs simply attempt to logon using a prede-
fined set of user IDs and passwords. In fact, NAT can do just that. NAT takesadvantage of some known weaknesses in Microsoft’s Server Message Block(SMB) protocol, which is used for file and print sharing.
Try running NAT in a real-world scenario. Simply download NAT from the pre-
ceding address, and extract it to a temporary directory on your hard drive.NAT comes with some predefined usernames and passwords in the 
userlist.
txt and passlist.txt files, but you can modify them or add your own. For
a quick test of a Windows NT or 2000 machine across the network, enter thisbasic NAT command at a command prompt:
nat -u userlist.txt -p passlist.txt IP_address_of_the_computer_you’re_testing
Figure 7-1 shows the output of my test server when I ran NAT against it. NATused the default password list to crack the administrator password in just afew seconds. If you don’t have any luck, consider using one of the dictionaryfiles listed in the next section. Just give the test some time. If you use one ofthe larger lists, the process may take quite a while.
Passwords that are subjected to cracking tools eventually lose. You have
access to the same tools as the bad guys. These tools can be used for bothlegitimate auditing and malicious attacks. You want to audit your passwordsbefore the bad guys do, and in this section, I show you some of my favoritemethods for auditing Windows and Linux/UNIX passwords.
Figure 7-1:
Output from
the NetBIOS
Auditing
Tool.86 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 86
--- Page 110 ---
When trying to crack passwords, the associated user accounts may be locked
out, which could interrupt your users. Be careful if you have intruder lockoutenabled — you may have to go back in and reenable locked accounts.
Passwords are typically stored on a computer in an encrypted fashion, using
an encryption or one-way hash algorithm such as DES or MD5. Hashed pass-words are then represented as fixed-length encrypted strings that always rep-resent the same passwords with exactly the same strings. These hashes areirreversible for all practical purposes, so passwords can never be decrypted.
Password storage locations vary by operating system:
/H12012Windows usually stores passwords in these locations:
• Security Accounts Manager (SAM) database
(
c:\winnt\system32\config )
• Active Directory database file that’s stored locally or spread across
domain controllers ( ntds.dit )
Windows sometimes stores passwords in either a backup of the SAM file
in the c:\winnt\repair directory or on an emergency repair disk.
Some Windows applications store passwords in the Registry or as plain-text files on the hard drive!
/H12012Linux and other UNIX variants typically store passwords in these files:
•
/etc/passwd (readable by everyone)
•/etc/shadow (accessible by root only)
•/etc/security/passwd (accessible by root only)
•/.secure/etc/passwd (accessible by root only)
Two high-tech password-cracking methods are dictionary attacks and brute-force attacks.
Dictionary attacks
Dictionary attacks against passwords quickly compare a set of words —including many common passwords — against a password database. Thisdatabase is a text file with thousands of words typically listed in alphabeticalorder. For instance, suppose that you have a dictionary file that you down-loaded from one of the sites in the following list. The English dictionary file atthe Purdue site contains one word per line starting with 10th, 1st . . . all the
way to zucchini and zygote.
Many password-cracking utilities can use a separate dictionary that youcreate or download from the Internet. Here are some popular sites thathouse dictionary files and other miscellaneous word lists:87 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 87
--- Page 111 ---
/H12012ftp://ftp.cerias.purdue.edu/pub/dict
/H12012ftp://ftp.ox.ac.uk/pub/wordlists
/H12012packetstormsecurity.nl/Crackers/wordlists
/H12012www.outpost9.com/files/WordLists.html
Most dictionary attacks are good for weak (easily guessed) passwords.
However, some special dictionaries have common misspellings of words such
as pa$$w0rd (password) and 5ecur1ty (security), non-English words, and the-matic words from religions, politics, or Star Trek.
Brute-force attacks
Brute-force attacks can crack any password, given sufficient time. Brute-forceattacks try every combination of numbers, letters, and special charactersuntil the password is discovered. Many password-cracking utilities let youspecify such testing criteria as the characters and password length to try.
A brute-force test can take quite a while, depending on the number of accounts,
their associated password complexities, and the speed of the computer that’srunning the cracking software.
Smart hackers attempt logins slowly or at random times so the failed login
attempts aren’t as predictable or obvious in the system log files. Some mali-cious users may even call the IT help desk to attempt a reset of the accountthey’ve just locked out. This social-engineering technique could be a majorissue, especially if the organization has no or minimal mechanisms in place toverify that locked-out users are who they say they are.
Can an expiring password deter a hacker’s attack and render password-
cracking software useless? Yes. After the password is changed, the crackingmust start again if the hacker wants to test all the possible combinations.This is one reason why passwords must be changed periodically. Shorteningthe change interval can reduce the risk of a password’s being cracked.
Exhaustive password-cracking attempts usually aren’t necessary. Most pass-
words are fairly weak. Even minimum password requirements, such as a pass-word length, can help you in your testing; you may be able to give yourcracking programs more defined cracking parameters, which eliminates com-binations for faster results.
Cracking passwords with pwdump2 and John the Ripper
The following steps use two of my favorite utilities to test the security of cur-rent passwords on Windows systems:88 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 88
--- Page 112 ---
/H12012pwdump2 (to extract password hashes from the Windows SAM database)
/H12012John the Ripper (to crack the hashes of Windows and UNIX passwords)
This test requires administrative access to either your Windows NT/2000
stand-alone workstation or server:
1. Create a new directory called passwords from the root of your
Windows C: drive.
2. Download and install a decompression tool, if you don’t have one.
FreeZip (members.ozemail.com.au/~nulifetv/freezip ) and IZArc
(www.webattack.com/get/izarc.shtml ) are free Windows decom-
pression tools. Windows XP includes built-in decompression.
3. Download, extract, and install the following software, if you don’t
already have it on your system:
• pwdump2 — download the file from razor.bindview.com/
tools/desc/pwdump2_readme.html
• John the Ripper — download the file from www.openwall.com/john
4. Enter the following command to run pwdump2 and redirect its output
to a file called cracked.txt :
pwdump2 > cracked.txt
This file will be used to store the Windows SAM password hashes thatwill later be cracked with John the Ripper. Figure 7-2 shows the contentsof the 
cracked.txt file that contains the local Windows SAM-database
password hashes.
5. Enter the following command to review the contents from the resulting
hashes:
type cracked.txt
All the users on your system are listed (similar to Figure 7-3), whetheryou run this on a stand-alone Windows NT/2000 system or WindowsPrimary Domain Controller (PDC).
Figure 7-2:
Output from
pwdump2.89 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 89
--- Page 113 ---
6. Enter the following command to run John the Ripper against the
Windows SAM password hashes to display the cracked passwords:
john cracked.txt
You should see something similar to the following:
Loaded 3 passwords with no different salts (NT LM DES [24/32 4K])
123 (Weak:1)PASS (Newuser:1)GUESS (Lame:1)
guesses: 3 time: 0:00:00:00 (3) c/s: 165146 trying: SAMELL - SANDIT
This process can take seconds or days, depending on the number of
users and the complexity of their associated passwords. My Windowsexample took only five seconds to crack five weak passwords.
John the Ripper can crack UNIX passwords. You need root access to yoursystem and to the password (
/etc/passwd ) and shadow password
(/etc/shadow ) files. Perform the following steps for cracking UNIX
passwords:
1. Download the UNIX source files from www.openwall.com/john .
2. Extract the program by entering the following command:
tar -zxf john-1.6.tar.gz
3. Change into the /src directory that was created when you extracted
the program, and enter the following command:
make generic .
4. Change into the /run directory, and enter the following command to
use the unshadow program to combine the passwd and shadow filesand copy them to the file 
cracked.txt :
./unshadow /etc/passwd /etc/shadow > cracked.txt
5. Enter the following command to start the cracking process:
./john cracked.txt
When John the Ripper is complete (and this could take some time), youget an output similar to the results of the preceding Windows process.
Figure 7-3:
Cracked
password
file hashes
from
pwdump2.90 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 90
--- Page 114 ---
After completing the preceding Windows or UNIX steps, you can either
/H12012Force users to change passwords that don’t meet specific password
policy requirements.
/H12012Create a password policy from scratch.
Be careful handling the results of your password cracking. Password informa-tion for others is confidential and should be treated with care.
Checking for null passwords in NetWare
Using the chknull program, you can test for NetWare users that have emptypasswords, passwords that match their username, or passwords that matcha specific password that you supply on the command line. Figure 7-4 showsthe output of a chknull session against a NetWare server without being loggedin: Four users have blank passwords, three users have the password “123,”and one user’s password is the same as his username (avadminuser).
General password-hacking
countermeasures
A password for one system usually equals passwords for many other sys-
tems, because many people use the same passwords on every system theyuse. For this reason, instruct users to create different passwords for differentsystems, especially on the systems that protect more sensitive information.
Strong passwords are important, but balance security and convenience:
/H12012You can’t expect users to memorize passwords that are insanely com-
plex and changed every week.
/H12012You can’t afford weak passwords or no passwords at all.
Figure 7-4:
NetWare
password
weaknesses
found with
chknull.91 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 91
--- Page 115 ---
Storing passwords
If you have to choose between weak passwords that your users can memo-
rize and strong passwords that your users must write down, I recommendhaving readers write down passwords and store the information securely.Train users to store their written passwords in a secure place — not on key-boards or in easily cracked password-protected computer files (such asspreadsheets). Users should store a written password in either of theselocations:
/H12012A locked file cabinet or office safe
/H12012An encrypted file or database, using such tools as
• PGP (
www.pgpi.org for the free open-source version or www.
pgp.com for the commercial version)
• Open-source Password Safe, originally developed by Counterpane
(passwordsafe.sourceforge.net )
No sticky notes!
Policy considerations
As an ethical hacker, you should show users the importance of securing theirpasswords. Here are some tips on how to do that:92 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 
Passwords by the numbers
One hundred twenty-eight different ASCII char-
acters are used in typical computer passwords.(Technically, only 126 characters are used,because you can’t use the NULL and the car-riage return characters.) A truly random eight-character password that uses 126 differentcharacters can have 63,527,879,748,485,376 dif-ferent combinations. Taking that a step further,if it were possible (and it is, in Linux and UNIX)to use all 256 ASCII characters (254, withoutNULL and carriage return) in a password,17,324,859,965,700,833,536 different combina-tions are possible. This is approximately 2.7 bil-lion times more combinations than there arepeople on earth!
A text file containing all these possible pass-
words would require millions of terabytes ofstorage space. Even if you included just themore realistic combination of 95 or so ASCII let-ters, numbers, and standard punctuation char-acters, such a file would still fill thousands ofterabytes of storage space. These storagerequirements require password-cracking pro-grams to form the password combinations onthe fly, instead of reading all possible combina-tions from a text file. That’s why brute-forceattacks are more effective at cracking pass-words than dictionary attacks.
Given the effectiveness of brute-force pass-
word attacks, it’s not unrealistic to think that inthe future, anyone will be able to crack all pos-sible password combinations, given the currenttechnology and average lifespan. It probablywon’t happen, but many of us also thought in themid-1980s that 640KB of RAM and 10MB harddrives in our PCs were all we needed.11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 92
--- Page 116 ---
/H12012Demonstrate how to create secure passwords. You may want to refer to
them as pass codes or pass phrases, because people tend to take theword passwords literally and use only words, which can be less secure.
/H12012Show what can happen when weak passwords are used or passwordsare shared.
/H12012Diligently build user awareness of social-engineering attacks.
Enforce (or encourage the use of) a strong password-creation policy thatincludes the following criteria:
/H12012Use upper- and lowercase letters, special characters, and numbers.(Never use only numbers. These passwords can be cracked quickly.)
/H12012Misspell words or create acronyms from a quote or a sentence. (Anacronym is a word created from the initials of a phrase. For example,
ASCII is an acronym for American Standard Code for Information
Interchange.)
/H12012Use punctuation characters to separate words or acronyms.
/H12012Change passwords every 6 to 12 months.
/H12012Use different passwords for each system. This is especially importantfor network-infrastructure hosts, such as servers, firewalls, and routers.
/H12012Use variable-length passwords. This can throw off the hackers, becausethey won’t know the required minimum or maximum length of passwordsand must try all password length combinations.
/H12012Don’t use common slang words or words that are in a dictionary.
/H12012Don’t use similar-looking characters, such as 3instead of E, 5 instead
ofS, or ! instead of 1.Password-cracking programs can check for this.
/H12012Don’t reuse the same password within 12 months.
/H12012Use password-protected screen savers.
/H12012Don’t share passwords.
/H12012Avoid storing user passwords in a central place, such as an unsecuredspreadsheet on a hard drive. This is an invitation for disaster. Use PGP,Password Safe, or a similar program to store user passwords.
Other considerations
Here are some other password-hacking countermeasures that I recommend:
/H12012Enable security auditing to help monitor and track password attacks.
/H12012Test your applications to make sure they aren’t storing passwords inmemory or writing them to disk.93 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 93
--- Page 117 ---
Some password-cracking Trojan-horse applications are transmitted
through worms or simple e-mail attachments, such as VBS.Network.B and
PWSteal.SoapSpy . These applications can be lethal to your password-
protection mechanisms if they’re installed on your systems. The bestdefense is malware protection software, such as antivirus protection(from a vendor like Norton or McAfee), spyware protection (such asPestPatrol or Spybot), or malicious-code behavioral protection (such as Finjan’s offerings).
/H12012Keep your systems patched. Passwords are reset or compromisedduring buffer overflows or other DoS conditions.
/H12012Know your user IDs. If an account has never been used, delete or disable the account until it’s needed. You can determine unusedaccounts by manual inspection or by using a tool such as DumpSec(
www.somarsoft.com ), which can enumerate the Windows operating
system and gather user ID and other information.
As the security administrator in your organization, you can enable account
lockout to prevent password-cracking attempts. Most operating systems and
some applications have this capability. Don’t set it too low (less than five failedlogins), and don’t set it too high to give a malicious user a greater chance ofbreaking in. Somewhere between 5 and 50 may work for you. I usually recom-mend a setting of around 10 or 15.
/H12012To use account lockout and prevent any possibilities of a user DoS con-dition, require two different passwords, and don’t set a lockout time forthe first one.
/H12012If you permit auto reset of the account after a certain time period —often referred to as intruder lockout — don’t set a short time period.
Thirty minutes often works well.
A failed login counter can increase password security and minimize the over-all effects if the account is being compromised by an automated attack. It canforce a password change after a number of failed attempts. If the number offailed login attempts is high, and they all occurred in a short period of time,the account has likely experienced an automated password attack.
Some more password-protection countermeasures include the following:
/H12012Use stronger authentication methods, such as challenge/response, smart
cards, tokes, biometrics, or digital certificates.
/H12012Automate password reset. This functionality lets users to manage mostof their password problems without getting others involved. Otherwise,this support issue becomes expensive, especially for larger organizations.
/H12012Password-protect the system BIOS (basic input/output system). This isespecially important on servers and laptops that are susceptible tophysical-security threats and vulnerabilities.94 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 94
--- Page 118 ---
Password-protected files
Do you wonder how vulnerable word-processing, spreadsheet, and zip files
are as users send them into the wild blue yonder? Wonder no more. Somegreat utilities can show how easily passwords are cracked.
Cracking files
Most password-protected files can be cracked in seconds or minutes. You candemonstrate this “wow-factor” security vulnerability to users and manage-ment. Here’s a real-world scenario:
/H12012Your CFO wants to send some confidential financial information in anExcel spreadsheet to the company’s outside financial advisor.
/H12012She protects the spreadsheet by assigning a password to it during thefile-save process in Excel 2002.
/H12012For good measure, she uses WinZip to compress the file, and addsanother password to make it really secure.
/H12012The CFO sends the spreadsheet as an e-mail attachment, assuming thatit will reach its destination securely.
The financial advisor’s network has content filtering, which monitors
incoming e-mails for keywords and file attachments. Unfortunately, thefinancial advisory firm’s network administrator is looking in the content-filtering system to see what’s coming in.
/H12012This rogue network administrator finds the e-mail with the con-fidential attachment, saves the attachment, and realizes that it’spassword-protected.
/H12012The network administrator remembers some great password-crackingutilities from ElcomSoft (
www.elcomsoft.com ) that can help him out. He
may see something like Figures 7-5 and 7-6.
Cracking password-protected files is as simple as that! Now all that the roguenetwork administrator must do is forward the confidential spreadsheet to hisbuddies or the company’s competitors.
If you carefully select the right options in Advanced ZIP Password Recovery
and Office XP Password Recovery, you can drastically shorten your testingtime. For example, if you know that a password is not over 5 characters or islowercase letters only, you can cut the cracking time in half.
I recommend performing these file password-cracking tests on files that you
capture with a content-filtering or network-analysis tool. 95 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 95
--- Page 119 ---
Countermeasures
The best defense against weak file password protection is to require your
users to use a stronger form of file protection, such as PGP, when necessary.Ideally, you don’t want to rely on users to make decisions about what theyshould use this method to secure, but it’s better than nothing. Stress that afile-encryption mechanism such as PGP is secure only if users keep theirpasswords confidential and never transmit or store them in clear text.
Figure 7-6:
ElcomSoft’s
Advanced
Office XP
Password
Recovery
cracking 
a spread-
sheet.
Figure 7-5:
ElcomSoft’s
Advanced
ZIP
Password
Recovery
cracking a
zip file.96 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 96
--- Page 120 ---
If you’re concerned about nonsecure transmissions through e-mail, consider
one of these options:
/H12012Block all outbound e-mail attachments that aren’t protected on youre-mail server.
/H12012Use an encryption program, such as PGP, to create self-extractingencrypted files.
/H12012Use content-filtering applications.
Other ways to crack passwords
Over the years, I’ve found other ways to crack passwords, both technicallyand through social engineering.
Keystroke logging
One of the best techniques for cracking passwords is remote keystroke
logging — the use of software or hardware to record keystrokes as they’re
being typed into the computer.
Be careful with keystroke logging. Even with good intentions, monitoring
employees can raise some legal issues. Discuss what you’ll be doing withyour legal counsel, and get approval from upper management.
Logging tools
With keystroke-logging tools, you can later assess the log files of your appli-cation to see what passwords people are using:
/H12012Keystroke-logging applications can be installed on the monitored com-puter. I recommend that you check out eBlaster and Spector Pro bySpectorSoft (
www.spectorsoft.com ). Another popular tool that you
can use is Invisible KeyLogger Stealth, at www.amecisco.com/iks.htm ,
as well as the hardware-based KeyGhost ( www.keyghost.com ). Dozens
of other such tools are available on the Internet.
/H12012Hardware-based tools fit between the keyboard and the computer orreplace the keyboard altogether.
A shared computer can capture the passwords of every user who logs in.
Countermeasures
The best defense against the installation of keystroke-logging software onyour systems is a spyware-detection program or popular antivirus products.97 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 97
--- Page 121 ---
The potential for hackers to install keystroke-logging software is another
reason to ensure that your users aren’t downloading and installing randomshareware or opening attachments in unsolicited e-mails. Consider lockingdown your desktops by setting the appropriate user rights through local orgroup security policy in Windows. Alternatively, you could use a commerciallock-down program, such as Fortres 101 (
www.fortres.com ) for Windows or
Deep Freeze ( www.deepfreezeusa.com ) for Windows and Mac OS X.
Weak password storage
Many legacy and stand-alone applications such as e-mail, dial-up networkconnections, and accounting software store passwords locally, making themvulnerable to password hacking. By performing a basic text search, I’ve foundpasswords stored in clear text on the local hard drives of machines.
Searching
You can try using your favorite text-searching utility — such as the Windowssearch function, 
findstr , or grep — to search for password or passwd on your
drives. You may be shocked to find what’s on your systems. Some programseven write passwords to disk or leave them stored in memory.
This is a hacker’s dream. Head it off if you can.
Countermeasures
The only reliable way to eliminate weak password storage is to use only appli-
cations that store passwords securely. This may not be practical, but it’s your
only guarantee that your passwords are secure.
Before upgrading applications, contact your software vendor or search for a
third-party solution.
Network analyzer
A network analyzer sniffs the packets traversing the network. This is what thebad guys do if they can gain control over a computer or gain physical networkaccess to set up their network analyzer. If they gain physical access, they canlook for a network jack on the wall and plug right in!
Testing
Figure 7-7 shows how crystal-clear passwords can be through the eyes of anetwork analyzer. This figure shows the password packet from an EtherPeekcapture of a POP3 session using Microsoft Outlook to download messagesfrom an e-mail server. Look in the POP — Post Office Protocol section for thepassword of “MyPassword”. These same clear-text password vulnerabilitiescan apply to instant messaging, Web-site logins, telnet sessions, and more.Basically, if traffic is not being tunneled through a VPN, SSH, SSL, or someother form of encrypted link, it’s vulnerable to attack.98 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 98
--- Page 122 ---
Although you can benefit from using a commercial network analyzer such as
EtherPeek, you don’t need to buy one for your testing. An open-source pro-gram, Ethereal, runs on Windows and UNIX platforms. You can search forpassword traffic on the network a million ways. For example, to capture POP3password traffic, set up a trigger to search for the PASS command. When thenetwork analyzer sees the PASS command in the packet, it starts capturingdata until your specified time or number of packets.
Capture this data on a hub segment of your network, or plug your network-
analyzer system into a monitor port on a switch. Otherwise, you can’t seeanyone else’s data traversing the network — just yours. Check your switch’suser’s guide for whether it has a monitor or mirror port and instructions onhow to configure it. You can connect your network analyzer to a hub on thepublic side of your firewall. You’ll capture only those packets that are enter-ing or leaving your network — not internal traffic.
Countermeasures
Here are some good defenses against network-analyzer attacks:
/H12012Use switches on your network, not hubs.
If you must use hubs on network segments, a program such as sniffdet,
cpm, and sentinel can detect network cards in promiscuous mode
(accepting all packets, whether destined for it or not). Network cards inthis mode are signs of a network analyzer running on the network.
/H12012Don’t let a hacker gain physical access to your switches or the networkconnection on the public side of your firewall. With physical access, ahacker can connect to a switch monitor port, or tap into the unswitchednetwork segment outside the firewall and capture packets.
Switches do not provide complete security because they are vulnerable toARP poisoning attacks, which I cover in Chapter 9.
Most computer BIOSs allow power-on passwords and/or setup passwords to
protect the computer’s hardware settings that are stored in the CMOS chip.Here are some ways around these passwords:
Figure 7-7:
An
EtherPeek
capture
of a POP3
password
packet.99 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 99
--- Page 123 ---
/H12012You can usually reset these passwords by either unplugging the CMOS
battery or changing a jumper on the motherboard.
/H12012Password-cracking utilities for BIOS passwords are available.
Some systems (especially laptops) can’t be reset easily. You can lose all thehardware settings and lock yourself out of your own computer. If you plan tohack your own BIOS passwords, check for information in your user manual oron 
labmice.techtarget.com/articles/BIOS_hack.htm on doing this
safely.
Weak passwords in limbo
Bad guys often exploit user accounts that have just been reset by a networkadministrator or help desk. Accounts may need to be reset if users forget theirpasswords, or if the accounts have been locked out because of failed attempts.
Weaknesses
Here are some reasons why user accounts can be vulnerable:
/H12012When user accounts are reset, they often are assigned an easily crackedpassword (such as the user’s name or the word password ). The time
between resetting the user account and changing the password is aprime opportunity for a break-in.
/H12012Many systems have either default accounts or unused accounts withweak passwords or no passwords at all. These are prime targets.
Countermeasures
The best defenses against attacks on passwords in limbo are solid help-deskpolicies and procedures that prevent weak passwords from being available atanygiven time during the password-reset process. Perhaps the best ways to
overcome this vulnerability are as follows:
/H12012Require users to be on the phone with the help desk, or have a help-desk member perform the reset at the user’s desk.
/H12012Require that the user immediately log in and change his password.
/H12012If you need the ultimate in security, implement stronger authenticationmethods, such as challenge/response, smart cards, or digital certificates.
/H12012Automate password-reset functionality on your network so users canmanage most of their password problems without help from others.
For a good list of default system passwords for vendor equipment, check
www.cirt.net/cgi-bin/passwd.pl .
Password-reset programs
Network administrators occasionally use administrator password-resettingprograms, which can be used against a network.100 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 100
--- Page 124 ---
Tools
One of my favorites for Windows is NTAccess ( www.mirider.com/ntaccess.
html) . This program isn’t fancy, but it does the job.
Countermeasures
The best safeguard against a hacker using a password-reset program against
your systems is to ensure the hacker can’t gain physical access. When ahacker has physical access, all bets are off.
Securing Operating Systems
You can implement various operating-system security measures to ensurethat passwords are protected. 
Regularly perform these low-tech and high-tech password-cracking tests to
make sure that your systems are as secure as possible — perhaps as part of amonthly, quarterly, or biannual audit.
Windows
The following countermeasures can help prevent password hacks onWindows systems:
/H12012Some Windows passwords can be gleaned by simply reading the cleartext or crackable cipher text from the Windows Registry. Secure yourregistries by doing the following:
• Allowing only administrator access.
• Hardening the operating system by using well-known hardening
best practices, such as such as those from SANS (
www.sans.org ),
NIST (csrc.nist.gov ), the National Security Agency Security
Recommendation Guides ( www.nsa.gov/snac/index.html ), and
the ones outlined in Network Security For Dummies, by Chey Cobb
(Wiley Publishing, Inc.).
/H12012Use SYSKEY for enhanced Windows password protection.
• By default, Windows 2000 encrypts the SAM database that stores
hashes of the Windows account passwords. It’s not the default in
Windows NT.
• You can use the SYSKEY utility to encrypt the database for
Windows NT machines and to move the database-encryption keyfrom Windows 2000 and later machines.
Don’t rely only on the SYSKEY utility. Tools such as ElcomSoft’sAdvanced EFS Data Recovery program can crack SYSKEY encryption.101 Chapter 7: Passwords11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 101
--- Page 125 ---
/H12012Keep all SAM-database backup copies secure.
/H12012Disable the storage of LM hashes in Windows for passwords that are
shorter than 15 characters.
For example, in Windows 2000 SP2 and later, you can create and set the
NoLMHash registry key to a value of 1 under HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\
SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Lsa .
/H12012Use passfilt.dll or local or group security policies to help eliminate weakpasswords on Windows systems before they’re created.
/H12012Disable null sessions in your Windows version:
• In Windows XP, enable the Do Not Allow Anonymous Enumeration
of SAM Accounts and Shares option in the local security policy.
• In Windows 2000, enable the No Access without Explicit
Anonymous Permissions option in the local security policy.
• In Windows NT, enable the following Registry key:
HKLM/System/CurrentControlSet/Control/LSA/RestrictAnonymous=1
Linux and UNIX
The following countermeasures can help prevent password cracks on Linuxand UNIX systems:
/H12012Use shadowed MD5 passwords.
/H12012Help prevent weak passwords from being created. You can use eitherbuilt-in operating-system password filtering (such as cracklib in Linux)or a password auditing program (such as npasswd or passwd+).
/H12012Check your 
/etc/passwd file for duplicate root UID entries. Hackers can
exploit such entries as root backdoors.102 Part II: Putting Ethical Hacking in Motion 11 55784x Ch07.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 102
--- Page 126 ---
Part III
Network Hacking12 55784X PP03.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 103
--- Page 127 ---
In this part . . .
Now that you’re off and running with your ethical
hacking tests, it’s time to take things to a new level.
The previous tests — at least the social engineering andphysical security tests — have started at a high level andwere not that technical. Times are a-changin’! You nowneed to look at network security. This is where thingsstart getting more technical.
This part starts out by looking into one of the most over-
looked information security vulnerabilities. By that, I meanrogue modems installed on computers randomly through-out your network. This part then moves on to look at thenetwork as a whole from the inside and the outside foreverything from perimeter security to network scanningto DoS vulnerabilities and more. Finally, this part takes a look at how to assess the security of the wireless LANtechnology that’s introducing some serious security vul-nerabilities into networks these days.12 55784X PP03.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 104
--- Page 128 ---
Chapter 8
War Dialing
In This Chapter
/H17075Controlling dial-up access
/H17075Testing for war dialing weaknesses
/H17075Preventing war dialing
War dialing — the act of using a computer to scan other computers
automatically for accessible modems — was made popular in the movie
War Games . War dialing seems old-fashioned and less sexy than other hacking
techniques these days; however, it’s a very critical test to run against your
network. This chapter shows how to test for war dialing vulnerabilities andoutlines countermeasures to help keep your network from being victimized.
War Dialing
It’s amazing how often end users and careless network administrators con-nect modems to computers inside the network. Some companies spend anastonishing amount of money and effort to roll out intrusion-prevention soft-ware, application firewalls, and forensics protection tools while ignoring thatan unsecured modem on the network can render that protection worthless.
Modem safety
Modems are still on today’s networks because of leftover remote accessservers (RAS) that provide remote connectivity into the corporate network.Many network administrators — hesitant to deploy a VPN — still have modemson their servers and other hosts for other reasons, such as for administeringthe network, troubleshooting problems remotely, and even providing connec-tivity to remote offices. Some network administrators have legitimate modems
installed for third-party monitoring purposes and business continuity; modemsare a low-cost alternative network access method if the Internet connection isdown. Many of these modems — and their software — run in default modewith weak passwords or none at all.13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 105
--- Page 129 ---
Practically every computer sold today has a modem. End users create dial-up
networking connections so they can bypass the firewall-blocking and employee-monitoring systems in place on the corporate network. Many users want to dialinto their work computers from home. Some users even set up their modemsto send and receive faxes so that they eliminate every possible reason to leavetheir desks during the work day.
It’s not as big a deal if the modem is configured for outbound access only, but
there’s always a chance that someone can use it to obtain inbound access. A
software misconfiguration or a weak password can give a hacker access.So what’s the bottom line? Unsecured modems inside the network — and
even ones with basic passwords — can put your entire network at risk. Manyof these modems have remote-connectivity software such as pcAnywhere,Procomm Plus, and even Apple Remote Access and Timbuktu Pro for Applecomputers. This software can provide backdoor access to the entire network.In many cases, a hacker can take over the computer with the modem attachedand communications software running, gaining full access to everything thecurrently logged-in user can access. Ouch!
General telephone-system vulnerabilities
A war-dialing attack can uncover other telephone-system vulnerabilities:
/H12012Dial tone: Many phone switches support a repeat, or second dial tone,
for troubleshooting or other outbound call purposes. This allows aphone technician, a user, or even a hacker to enter a password at thefirst dial tone and make outbound calls to anywhere in the world — allon your organization’s dime. Many hackers use war dialing to detectrepeat dial tones so they can carry out these phone attacks in the future.
/H12012Voice mail: Voice-mail systems — especially PC-based types — and
entire private branch exchange (PBX) phone switches can be probed bywar-dialing software and later compromised by a hacker.
Attacking
War dialing is not that complicated. Depending on your tools and the amountof phone numbers you’re testing, this can be an easy test. War dialinginvolves these basic hacking methodologies:
/H12012Gathering public information and mapping your network
/H12012Scanning your systems
/H12012Determining what’s running on the systems discovered
/H12012Attempting to penetrate the systems discovered106 Part III: Network Hacking 13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 106
--- Page 130 ---
The process of war dialing is as simple as entering phone numbers into your
freeware or commercial war-dialing software and letting the program work itsmagic — preferably overnight, so you can get some sleep!
Before you get started, keep in mind that it might be illegal to war-dial in your
jurisdiction, so be careful! Also, make sure you war-dial only the numbersyou’re authorized to dial. Even though you will most likely perform your wardialing after hours — at night or over a weekend — make sure that upper107 Chapter 8: War Dialing
A case study in war dialing with David Rhoades
In this case study, David Rhoades, a well-known
war dialing and Web-application security expert,shared an experience performing an ISDN wardial. Here’s an account of what happened.
The situationA few years ago, Mr. Rhoades had an
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) cir-cuit in his home office for two voice lines. ISDNalso allowed him 128Kbps Internet access. HisISDN terminal adapter (sometimes incorrectly
called an ISDN modem ) allowed him to call
other ISDN numbers extremely fast. He decidedto write an ISDN war dialer that would takeadvantage of the amazing speed of ISDN. Inabout one second, he could dial the number anddetermine whether the other side was ISDN,ISDN with a busy signal, or a regular analogline. Analog war dialing is much slower. Ananalog modem would require at least 30 sec-onds to dial the number and recognize the otherend as a modem — and that assumes the otherend answers on the first ring. So an ISDN wardialer is very fast at locating other ISDN lines.The only downsides are that not all ISDN equip-ment can detect analog modems, and you mayhave to dial in a second time to detect themproperly. Why bother locating ISDN numberswith a war dial? If the other end is ISDN, a ter-minal adapter or some other piece of equipmentmight be remotely accessible just by calling it.
Shortly after Mr. Rhoades wrote the ISDN war
dialer, his company got a request for a war dialfor a large German bank. The only catch wasthat the project called for an ISDN war dial,because ISDN was popular in Europe and hiscustomer knew that the bank had lots of ISDNcircuits. Mr. Rhoades soon found himself on aflight to Frankfurt with his software and ISDNterminal adapter.
The outcomeMr. Rhoades found several ISDN and analog
lines within the bank’s system. His biggest chal-lenge was becoming familiar with the dial-insoftware packages, which were popular inEurope but unknown in the United States.Fortunately for Mr. Rhoades, most vendorsoffered free demos of their software, which hecould use to access the remote systems.
The bottom line is that if you want to be certain
that no dial-up connections to your networkexist, consider other methods of communica-tion, such as ISDN. Also, never assume thatwell-known communications software is beingused on the dial-up connection. If you don’t rec-ognize what’s answering, explore it further. Thebad guys most certainly will.
David Rhoades is a principal consultant
with Maven Security Consulting Inc. (
www.
mavensecurity.com ) and teaches at secu-
rity conferences around the globe for USENIX,the MIS Training Institute, and ISACA.13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 107
--- Page 131 ---
management and possibly even the people who are working know what
you’re doing. You don’t want anyone being surprised by this!
War dialing is slow, because it can take anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds or
longer to dial and test one number. A war-dialing test can take all night oreven a weekend to dial all the numbers in one exchange. To counter this, ifyou use ToneLoc for your war dialing, there’s a neat utility called Prescan,part of the ToneLoc Utilities Phun-Pak (
www.hackcanada.com/ice3/phreak )
that will let you fill in ToneLoc data files with known exchanges before youever get started. This can save a ton of time!
You may have several thousand phone numbers to test if you need to test
an entire exchange, so this process can take some time. If you use severalmodems at once for your tests, you can speed the testing time dramatically.However, before you can do this, several things have to be in place:
/H12012You need multiple analog lines to dial out from. Today, these analog linescan be hard to get.
/H12012Given the complexities involved, you may have to do one of the following:
• Be present during the tests so you can manage all the war-dialing
sessions you have to load.
• Automate the tests with batch files.
• Use a commercial war-dialing utility that supports simultaneous
testing with multiple modems.
Gathering information
To get started, you need phone numbers to test for modems. You can program
these numbers into your war-dialing software and automate the process.
You need to find two kinds of phone numbers for testing:
/H12012Dialing ranges assigned to your organization, such as the following:
• 555-0000 through 555-9999 (10,000 possible numbers)
• 555-0100 through 555-0499 (400 possible numbers)• 555-1550 through 555-1599 (50 possible numbers)
/H12012Nonstandard analog numbers that have a different exchange from your
main digital lines. These numbers may not be publicly advertised.
To find or verify your organization’s phone numbers, check these resources:
/H12012Local telephone white and yellow pages. Either refer to hard copies or
check out Internet sites such as 
www.switchboard.com .
/H12012Internet searches for your company name and main phone number.
(Check your organization’s Web site, too.)108 Part III: Network Hacking 13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 108
--- Page 132 ---
Google may find published numbers in surprising places, such as cham-
ber of commerce and industry association listings.
/H12012Internet domain name Whois entries at a lookup site such as www.
samspade.org . The Whois database often contains direct phone num-
bers and other contact information that can give a hacker a leg up onthe phone-number scheme within your organization.
/H12012Phone-service documentation, such as monthly phone bills and phone-
system installation paperwork
Selecting war-dialing tools
War dialing requires outbound phone access, software tools, and a compatiblemodem.
Software
Most war-dialing tools are freeware or shareware, but a few commercial war-dialing tools are also available, such as PhoneSweep by Sandstorm Enterprises(
www.sandstorm.net/products/phonesweep ).
These two freeware tools are very effective:
/H12012ToneLoc ( www.securityfocus.com/data/tools/auditing/pstn/
tl110.zip ), written by Minor Threat and Mucho Maas
/H12012THC-Scan, written by The Hacker’s Choice ( www.thc.org/releases.php )
There’s a list of war-dialing programs at www.pestpatrol.com/pestinfo/
phreaking_tool.asp . If the freeware tools don’t have features you need,
consider a commercial product, such as PhoneSweep.
Modems
A plain Hayes-compatible modem usually is fine for outbound war dialing.
I’ve had trouble running both ToneLoc and THC-Scan on various modems, so
you may have to tinker with COM port settings, modem initialization strings,and even modem types until you find a combinations that works.
The best way to determine what type of modem to use is to consult your war-
dialing software’s documentation:
/H12012If in doubt, go with a name-brand model, such as U.S. Robotics, 3Com, oran older Hayes unit.
/H12012As a last resort, check the modem documentation for features that themodem supports.
You can use this information to ensure you have the best software and hard-ware combination to minimize any potential headaches.109 Chapter 8: War Dialing13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 109
--- Page 133 ---
Some modems can increase war-dialing efficiency by detecting
/H12012Voices, which can speed up the war-dialing process
/H12012Second dial tones, which allows more dialing from the system
Dialing in from the outside
War dialing is pretty basic — you enter the phone numbers you want to dial
into your war-dialing software, kick off the program, and let it do its magic.When the war-dialing software finds a carrier (which is basically a validmodem connection), the software logs the number, hangs up, and triesanother number you programmed it to test.
Keep the following in mind to maximize your war-dialing efforts:
/H12012Configure your war-dialing software to dial the list of numbers randomly
instead of sequentially, if possible.
Some phone switches, war-dialing detection programs (such as
Sandstorm Enterprises’ Sandtrap), and even the phone company itselfmay detect and stop war dialing — especially when an entire exchangeof phone numbers is dialed sequentially or quickly.
/H12012If you’re dialing from a line that can block Caller ID, dial *67 immediatelybefore dialing the number so your phone number isn’t displayed. Thismay not work if you’re calling toll-free numbers.
/H12012If you’re dialing long-distance numbers during your testing, make surethat you know about the potential charges. Costs can add up fast!
Using tools
ToneLoc and THC-Scan are similar in usage and functionality:
/H12012Run a configuration utility to configure your modem and other dialsettings.
/H12012Run the executable file to war-dial.
There are a few differences between the two, such as timeout settings and otherenhanced menu functionality that was introduced in THC-Scan. You can get anoutline of all the differences at 
web.textfiles.com/software/toneloc.txt .
Configuration
In this example, I use my all-time favorite tool — ToneLoc — for war dialing.To begin the configuration process for ToneLoc, run the 
tlcfg.exe utility.
You can tweak modem, dialing, and logging settings.
Two settings on the ModemOptions menu are likely to need adjustments, as
shown in Figure 8-1:110 Part III: Network Hacking 13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 110
--- Page 134 ---
/H12012Serial port
• Enter 1, 2, 3, or 4 for the specific COM port where your modem is
installed.
• Leave the Port Address and Port IRQ settings at 0 for the default
settings unless you’ve made configuration changes to your modem.
If you’re not sure what port your modem is installed on, run msinfo32.
exefrom the Windows Start/Run prompt, and browse to the Components/
Modem folder. The modem’s COM port value is listed in the Attached To
item, as shown in Figure 8-2.
/H12012Baud rate. Enter at least 19,200 if your modem supports it — preferably115,000 if you have a 56K modem.
You may not be able to war-dial some older — and much slower —
modems if the rates don’t match.
Figure 8-2:
Determining
your
modem’s
port COM
port with the
Windows
System
Information
tool.
Figure 8-1:
Configuring
the modem
in ToneLoc’s
TLCFG
utility.111 Chapter 8: War Dialing13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 111
--- Page 135 ---
Testing
After you’ve configured ToneLoc, you’re ready to start war dialing with one of
the following options:
/H12012Number range. For a range of numbers from 770-555-1200 through
770-555-1209, enter the following command at a command prompt:
toneloc 770-555-12XX /R:00-09
This command tells ToneLoc to dial all numbers beginning with 404-555-15numbers and then use the range of 00 through 99 in place of 
XX.
/H12012Single number. To test one number (770-555-1234), enter it at a command
prompt like this:
toneloc 770-555-123X /R:4-4
To see all the command-line options, enter toneloc by itself at a command
prompt.
After you enter the appropriate command (if you’ve configured the program
correctly and your modem is working), ToneLoc produces test results in twoforms:
/H12012Activity and counter display. As shown in Figure 8-3, ToneLoc displays its
activity and increments its counters, such as the number of carriers andbusy signals.
/H12012
tone.log file.The following information is stored in this log file:
• Records of all activities during testing. You can peruse this file for
failed attempts (such as busy signals) to retest later.
• Lists the carriers that ToneLoc discovered and such as the infor-
mation displayed as a login prompt. You can use this informationto penetrate your systems further.
Figure 8-3:
ToneLoc in
the middle
of a war
dial.112 Part III: Network Hacking 13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 112
--- Page 136 ---
An abbreviated tone.log file is as follows:
01:18:20 ¯
01:18:20 ToneLoc v1.10 (Sep 29 1994)01:18:20 ToneLoc started on 31-Jan-10401:18:20 Using COM1 (16450 UART)01:18:20 Data file:   770-555-.DAT01:18:20 Config file:  TL.CFG01:18:20 Log file:    TONE.LOG01:18:20 Mask used:   770-555-12XX01:18:20 Range used:   00-0901:18:20 Scanning for:  Carriers01:18:20 Initializing Modem ... Done01:18:24 770-555-1208 - Timeout (0)01:19:02 770-555-1201 - Busy01:19:40 770-555-1205 - No Carrier. . .01:22:52 770-555-1207 - * CARRIER *01:23:30 770-555-1204 - Timeout (0)01:24:08 Autosaving01:24:48 770-555-1206 - Timeout (0)01:25:20 All 10 numbers dialed01:25:20 Sending exit string ... Done01:25:21 Dials = 10, Dials/hour = 9401:25:21 0:07 spent current scan
01:25:21 Exit with errorlevel 0
In the sixth line of the preceding example, ToneLoc is configured to read the
TL.CFG file for its configuration options. With the seventh line, the findings
are written to the TONE.LOG file.
The range of numbers dialed is 770-555-1200 through 770-555-1209. You can
determine this by substituting the Range values (00-09) for the XXin the
mask. ToneLoc dials numbers randomly, as you can see since it started with770-555-1208, and so forth. The 1208, 1204, and 1206 numbers just timed out(meaning that no modem was detected). The 1201 number was apparentlybusy at the time, and the 1205 number didn’t answer at all. ToneLoc found acarrier (modem) on the 1207 number. Ah ha! Time to dig deeper to see what’son the other end — such as what you’re prompted with and details about theremote system that are given.
Rooting through the systems
When you identify phone numbers with modems attached, take one of theseactions to penetrate the system further and test for related vulnerabilities:
/H12012Stop your testing, determine whether the modems are legitimate, anddisable or remove any rogue modems.113 Chapter 8: War Dialing13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 113
--- Page 137 ---
/H12012Attempt to penetrate the systems further by
• Determining what application is listening on the other end by using
a communications program, such as Carbon Copy, Procomm Plus,
or the free HyperTerminal that’s built into Windows.
• Attempting to crack passwords, if necessary.
Commercial tools such as PhoneSweep automate this process for you —making purchasing such a tool a lot more attractive.
A few questions can help you determine what’s listening on the other end
and decide whether to investigate this device and possibly remove it:
/H12012How many rings does it take for the carrier to pick up?
/H12012Is the carrier available only during certain time periods?
/H12012What type of authentication prompt is presented (password only, userID and password, or another combination)?
/H12012Does login screen or banner tell you about the software that’s running?
Countermeasures
A few countermeasures can help protect your network against war dialing.
Phone numbers
You can protect your phone numbers — especially those that are assigned tomodems on critical computer systems — by:
/H12012Limiting the phone numbers that are made public.
Work with human resources, marketing, and management to ensure that
only necessary phone numbers are unveiled.
/H12012Obtaining analog-line phone numbers that aren’t within the standardexchange of your main digital lines. This prevents hackers from findingmodems within your main phone-number block.
Modem operation
You can help prevent unauthorized modem usage and operation by:
/H12012Documenting, publishing, and educating all end users on modem usage.
If users need modem access, require them to present the business reason.
/H12012Requiring strong passwords on all communications software.114 Part III: Network Hacking 13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 114
--- Page 138 ---
/H12012Purchasing dial-only modems or disabling inbound access in your com-
munications software.
/H12012Legacy applications may require occasional modem access. Make it
policy — and train your users — to keep the modem powered off orunplugged from the phone line when it’s not being used.
When installing modems into computers within the organization, require alldial-up networking through either a VPN or a modem pool connected to aRAS server that IT/security manages centrally. Review all telephone bills eachmonth to ensure that you don’t have unauthorized lines installed.
Installation
Secure modem placement maximizes security, prevents war-dialing attacks,and makes modem management and future ethical hacking tests much easier:
/H12012External modems are usually easy to see, but they can be hidden under
desks and forgotten.
/H12012Internal modems may require you to inspect every networked computer
physically for a phone cable plugged into the back.
Digital phone-line converters can allow a user to connect an analog modemto a digital line — which normally fries the modem.115 Chapter 8: War Dialing13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 115
--- Page 139 ---
116 Part III: Network Hacking 13 55784x Ch08.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 116
--- Page 140 ---
Chapter 9
Network Infrastructure
In This Chapter
/H17075Selecting tools
/H17075Scanning network hosts
/H17075Assessing security with a network analyzer
/H17075Preventing denial-of-service and infrastructure vulnerabilities
Your computer systems and applications require one of the most funda-
mental communications systems in your organization — your network.
Your network consists of such devices as routers, firewalls, and even generichosts (including servers and workstations) that you must assess as part ofthe ethical hacking process.
Many people refer to ethical hacking in terms of performing security tests
from a network-only perspective. This is only part of the overall issue. Youcan’t discount the basics of old-fashioned network security tests. I outlinethem in this chapter, with some solid countermeasures to foil attacks againstyour network.
There are thousands of possible network vulnerabilities, equally as many
tools, and even more testing techniques. You don’t need to test your networkfor every possible vulnerability, using every tool available and technique
imaginable. The tests in this chapter produce a good overall assessment ofyour network.
You can eliminate many well-known network vulnerabilities by simply patch-
ing your network hosts with the latest vendor software and firmware patches.Odds are that your network will not be attacked to exploit most of these vul-
nerabilities. Even if it is, the results are not likely to be detrimental. You caneliminate many other vulnerabilities by following some security best practiceson your network. The tests, tools, and techniques in this chapter offer themost bang for your ethical hacking buck.14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 117
--- Page 141 ---
118 Part III: Network Hacking 
A case study in hacking network infrastructures
with Laura Chappell
Laura Chappell — one of the world’s foremost
authorities on network protocols and analysis —shared with me an interesting experience shehad when assessing a customer’s network.Here’s her account of what happened.
The SituationMs. Chappell had a customer call with a routine
“the network is slow” problem. Upon her arrivalonsite, the customer mentioned sporadic out-ages and poor performance when connectingto the Internet as well. First, she examinedindividual flows between various clients andservers. Localized communications appearednormal, but any communication that flowedthrough the firewall to the Internet or otherbranch offices was severely delayed. It wastime to sniff the traffic going through the firewallto see whether she could isolate the cause ofthe delay.
The OutcomeA quick review of the traffic crossing the fire-
wall indicated that the outside links were satu-rated, so it was time to review and classify thetraffic. Using the Sniffer Network Analyzer, Ms.Chappell plugged in to examine the protocol dis-tribution. She saw that almost 45 percent of thetraffic was listed as “others” and was unrecog-nizable. She captured some data and found sev-eral references to pornographic images. Furtherexamination of the packets led her to two spe-cific port numbers that appeared consistently inthe trace files — port 1214 (Kazaa) and 6346(Gnutella), two peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharingapplications. She did a complete port scanof the network to see what was running andfound over 30 systems running either Kazaa orGnutella. Their file transfer processes wereeating up the bandwidth and dragging downall communications. It would have been simpleto shut down these systems and remove theapplications, but she wanted to investigatethem further without the users’ knowledge.
Ms. Chappell decided to use her own Kazaa and
Gnutella clients to look through the shared fold-ers of the systems. By becoming a peer memberwith the other hosts on the network, she couldperform searches through other shared folders,which indicated some of the users had sharedtheir network directories! Through these sharedfolders, she was able to obtain the corporatepersonnel roster, including home phone num-bers and addresses, accounting records, andseveral confidential memos that provided time-lines for projects under way at the company!
Many users said they shared these folders to
regain access to the P2P network, because theyhad previously been labeled free loaders
because their shares contained only a few files.They were under the delusion that because noone knew the filenames contained in the net-work directories, no one would search formatching values. Although this on-site visitstarted with a standard performance and com-munication review, it ended with the detectionof some huge security breaches in the com-pany. Anyone can use these P2P tools to getonto the network and grab the files in theshared folders — with no authorization orauthentication required!
Laura Chappell is Senior Protocol Analyst at
the Protocol Analysis Institute, LLC (
www.
packet-level.com ). A best-selling author
and lecturer, Ms. Chappell has trained thou-sands of network administrators, security tech-nicians, and law enforcement personnel onpacket-level security, troubleshooting, and opti-mization techniques. I highly recommend thatyou check out her Web site for some excellenttechnical content to help you become a betterethical hacker.14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 118
--- Page 142 ---
Network Infrastructure Vulnerabilities
Network infrastructure vulnerabilities are the foundation for all technical
security issues in your information systems. These lower-level vulnerabilitiesaffect everything running on your network. That’s why you need to test forthem and eliminate them whenever possible.
Your focus for ethical hacking tests on your network infrastructure should be
to find weaknesses that others can see in your network so you can quantifyyour level of exposure.
Many issues are related to the security of your network infrastructure. Some
issues are more technical and require you to use various tools to assess themproperly. You can assess others with a good pair of eyes and some logicalthinking. Some issues are easy to see from outside the network, and othersare easier to detect from inside your network.
Network infrastructure security involves assessing such areas as
/H12012Where such devices as a firewall or IDS (intrusion detection system) are
placed on the network and how they are configured
/H12012What hackers see when they perform port scans and how they canexploit vulnerabilities in your network hosts
/H12012Network design, such as Internet connections, remote-access capabili-ties, layered defenses, and placement of hosts on the network
/H12012Interaction of installed security devices
/H12012Protocols in use
/H12012Commonly attacked ports that are unprotected
/H12012Network host configuration
/H12012Network monitoring and maintenance
If any of these network security issues is exploited, bad things can happen:
/H12012A DoS attack can take down your Internet connection — or even yourentire network.
/H12012A hacker using a network analyzer can steal confidential information ine-mails and files being transferred.
/H12012Backdoors into your network can be set up.
/H12012Specific hosts can be attacked by exploiting local vulnerabilities acrossthe network.119 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 119
--- Page 143 ---
Before moving forward with assessing your network infrastructure security,
remember to do the following:
/H12012Test your systems from both the outside in and the inside out.
/H12012Obtain permission from partner networks that are connected to yournetwork to check for vulnerabilities on their ends that can affect your
network’s security, such as open ports and lack of a firewall or a miscon-figured router.
Choosing Tools
Your tests require the right tools. Great commercial, shareware, and freewaretools are available.
If you’re looking for easy-to-use security tools with all-in-one packaging, you get
what you pay for — most of the time — especially for the Windows platform.
Tons of security professionals swear by many free security tools, especially
those that run on UNIX-based operating systems. Many of these tools offer alot of value — if you have the time, patience, and willingness to learn their insand outs.
You can equip your toolbox with scanners and vulnerability-assessment tools.You need more than one tool. No tool does everything you need.
Scanners
These scanners provide practically all the port-scanning and network-testing
tools you’ll need:
/H12012Sam Spade for Windows (samspade.org/ssw ) for network queries from
DNS lookups to traceroutes
/H12012SuperScan (www.foundstone.com ) for ping sweeps and port scanning
/H12012NetScanTools Pro (www.netscantools.com ) for dozens of network
security-assessment functions, including ping sweeps, port scanning,and SMTP relay testing
/H12012Nmap (
www.insecure.org/nmap ) or NMapWin (sourceforge.net/
projects/nmapwin ) as a happy-clicky-GUI front end for host-port probing
and operating-system fingerprinting
/H12012Netcat (www.atstake.com/research/tools/network_utilities ) the
most versatile security tool for such security checks as port scanningand firewall testing
/H12012WildPackets EtherPeek (
www.wildpackets.com ) for network analysis120 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 120
--- Page 144 ---
Vulnerability assessment
These vulnerability-assessment tools will allow you to test your network
hosts for various known vulnerabilities as well as potential configurationissues that could lead to security exploits:
/H12012GFI LANguard Network Security Scanner (
www.gfi.com ) for port scan-
ning and other vulnerability testing
/H12012Nessus (www.nessus.org ) as a free all-in-one tool for such tests as ping
sweeps, port scanning, and vulnerability testing
/H12012Qualys QualysGuard (www.qualys.com ) as a great all-in-one tool for in-
depth vulnerability testing, if you can justify the cost
Scanning, Poking, and Prodding
Performing these ethical hacks on your network infrastructure involves fol-lowing basic hacking steps:
1. Gather information and map your network.
2. Scan your systems to see which are available.3. Determine what’s running on the systems discovered.4. Attempt to penetrate the systems discovered, if you choose to.
Every network card driver and implementation of TCP/IP in most operating
systems, including Windows and Linux, and even in your firewalls and routers,has quirks that result in different behaviors when scanning, poking, and prod-ding your systems. This can result in different responses from your varyingsystems. Refer to your administrator guides or vendor Web sites for detailson any known issues and possible patches that are available to fix them. Ifyou have all your systems patched, this shouldn’t be an issue.
Port scanners
A port scanner shows you what’s what on your network. It’s a software toolthat basically scans the network to see who’s there.
Port scanners provide basic views of how the network is laid out. They can
help identify unauthorized hosts or applications and network host configura-tion errors that can cause serious security vulnerabilities.
The big-picture view from port scanners often uncovers security issues
that may otherwise go unnoticed. Port scanners are easy to use and can test121 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 121
--- Page 145 ---
systems regardless of what operating systems and applications they’re run-
ning. The tests can be performed very quickly without having to touch indi-vidual network hosts, which would be a real pain otherwise.
The real trick to assessing your overall network security is interpreting the
results you get back. You can get false positives on open ports, and you mayhave to dig deeper. For example, UDP scans — like the protocol itself — areless reliable than TCP scans and often produce false positives, because manyapplications don’t know how to respond to random incoming UDP scans.
A feature-rich scanner — usually, a commercial product — often can identify
ports and see what’s running in one step.
Port-scan tests take time. The length of time depends on the number of hosts
you have, the number of ports you scan, the tools you use, and the speed ofyour network links.
Scan more than just the important hosts. These other systems often bite you
if you ignore them. Also, perform the same tests with different utilities to see
whether you get different results. Not all tools find the same open ports andvulnerabilities. This is unfortunate, but it’s a reality of ethical hacking tests.
If your results don’t match after you run the tests using different tools, you
may want to explore the issue further. If something doesn’t look right — suchas a strange set of open ports — it probably isn’t. Test it again; if you’re indoubt, use another tool for a different perspective.
As an ethical hacker, you should scan all 65,535 UDP and 65,535 TCP ports on
each network host that’s found by your scanner. If you find questionable ports,look for documentation that the application is known and authorized.
For speed and simplicity, you can scan commonly hacked ports (listed in
Table 9-1). 
Table 9-1 Commonly Hacked Ports
Port Numbers Service Protocols
7 Echo TCP , UDP
19 Chargen TCP , UDP
20 FTP data (File Transfer Protocol) TCP
21 FTP control TCP
22 SSH TCP
23 Telnet TCP122 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 122
--- Page 146 ---
Port Numbers Service Protocols
25 SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) TCP
37 Daytime TCP , UDP
53 DNS (Domain Name System) UDP
69 TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol) UDP
79 Finger TCP , UDP
80 HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) TCP
110 POP3 (Post Office Protocol version 3) TCP
111 SUN RPC (remote procedure calls) TCP , UDP
135 RPC/DCE end point mapper for Microsoft networks TCP , UDP
137, 138, 139 NetBIOS over TCP/IP TCP , UDP
161 SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol) TCP , UDP
220 IMAP (Internet Message Access Protocol) TCP
443 HTTPS (HTTP over SSL) TCP
512, 513, 514 Berkeley r commands (such as rsh, rexec, and rlogin) TCP
1214 Kazaa and Morpheus TCP , UDP
1433 Microsoft SQL Server TCP , UDP
1434 Microsoft SQL Monitor TCP , UDP
3389 Windows Terminal Server TCP
5631, 5632 pcAnywhere TCP
6346, 6347 Gnutella TCP , UDP
12345, 12346, NetBus TCP
12631, 12632, 
20034, 20035
27444 Trinoo UDP
27665 Trinoo TCP
31335 Trinoo UDP
31337 Back Orifice UDP
34555 Trinoo UDP123 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 123
--- Page 147 ---
Ping sweep
A ping sweep of all your network subnets and hosts is a good way to find out
which hosts are alive and kicking on the network. A ping sweep is when youping a range of addresses using Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)packets. Figure 9-1 shows the command and the results of using Nmap to per-form a ping sweep of a class C subnet range.
Dozens of Nmap command-line options exist, which can be overwhelming
when you just want to do a basic scan. You can just enter 
nmap on the com-
mand line to see all the options available.
These command-line options can be used for an Nmap ping sweep:
/H12012-sP tells Nmap to perform a ping scan.
/H12012-ntells Nmap to not perform name resolution.
You may want to omit this if you want to resolve hostnames to see which
systems are responding. Name resolution may take slightly longer, though.
•-T 4 option tells Nmap to perform an aggressive (faster) scan.
•192.168.1.1-254 tells Nmap to scan the entire 192.168.1.x subnet.
Port scanning
Most port scanners operate in three steps:
1. The port scanner sends TCP SYN requests to the host or range of hosts
you set it to scan.
Some port scanners, such as SuperScan, perform ping sweeps to deter-
mine which hosts are available before starting the TCP port scans.
Most port scanners scan only TCP ports by default. Don’t forget about
UDP ports. You can scan UDP ports with a UDP port scanner such asNmap LANguard Network Security Scanner.
Figure 9-1:
Performing
a ping
sweep of
an entire
class C
network
with Nmap.124 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 124
--- Page 148 ---
2. The port scanner waits for replies from the available hosts.
3. The port scanner probes these available hosts for up to 65,535 possible
TCP and UDP ports — based on which ports you tell it to scan — to see
which ones have available services on them.
The port scans provide the following information about the live hosts onyour network:
/H12012Hosts that are active and reachable through the network
/H12012Network addresses of the hosts found
/H12012Services or applications that the hosts may be running
After performing a generic sweep of the network, you can dig deeper intospecific hosts you’ve found.
SuperScan
My favorite tool to perform generic TCP port scans is SuperScan. Figure 9-2shows the results of my scan and a few interesting ports open on severalhosts, including Windows Terminal Server and SSH.
In Figure 9-2, I selected the Only Scan Responsive Pings and All Selected Ports
in List options. However, you may want to select some other options:
Figure 9-2:
A TCP port
scan using
SuperScan.125 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 125
--- Page 149 ---
/H12012If you don’t want to ping each host first — which helps make the test run
more efficiently — deselect the Only Scan Responsive Pings option. (ICMPcan be blocked, which can cause the scanner to not find certain hosts.)
/H12012If you want to scan a certain range of well-known ports or ports specificto your systems, you can configure SuperScan to do so. I recommendthese settings:
• If you want to perform a scan on well-known ports, at least select
the All Selected Ports in List option.
• If this is your initial scan, scan all ports from 1 to 65,535.
Nmap
After you have a general idea of what hosts are available and what ports areopen, you can perform fancier scans to verify that the ports are actually openand not being reported as a false positive. If you wish to do this, Nmap is theperfect tool to use. Nmap allows you to run the following additional scans:
/H12012Connect: This basic TCP scan looks for any open TCP ports on the host.
You can use this scan to see what’s running and determine whether IDSs,firewalls, or other logging devices log the connections.
/H12012UDP Scan: This basic UDP scan looks for any open UDP ports on the
host. You can use this scan to see what’s running and determinewhether IDSs, firewalls, or other logging devices log the connections.
/H12012SYN Stealth: This scan creates a half-open TCP connection with the host
possibly evading IDS systems and logging. This is a good scan for testingIDSs, firewalls, and other logging devices.
/H12012FIN Stealth, Xmas Tree, and Null: These scans let you mix things up a
bit — no pun intended — by sending strangely formed packets to yournetwork hosts so you can see how they respond. These scans basicallychange around the flags in the TCP headers of each packet, which allowsyou to test how each host handles them to point out weak TCP/IP imple-mentations and patches that may need to be applied.
Be careful when performing these scans. You can create your own DoS attackand potentially crash applications or entire systems. Unfortunately, if youhave a host with a weak TCP/IP stack (the software that controls TCP/IP com-munications on your hosts), there is no good way to prevent this. The bestway to reduce the chance of this occurring is to use the slow Nmap timingoptions — Paranoid, Sneaky, or Polite — when running your scans.
Figure 9-3 shows the NMapWin Scan tab, where you can select all these
options. If you’re a command-line fan, you see the command-line parametersdisplayed in the lower-left corner of the NMapWin screen. This helps whenyou know what you want to do and the command-line help isn’t enough.126 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 126
--- Page 150 ---
If you connect to a single port carefully enough (as opposed to several all at
once) without making too much noise, you may be able evade your IDS/IDPsystem. This is a good test of your IDS and firewall systems, so assess yourlogs to see what they saw during this process.
Countermeasures
You can implement various countermeasures to typical port scanning.
Traffic restriction
Enable only the traffic you need to access internal hosts — preferably as faras possible from the hosts you’re trying to protect. You apply these rules intwo places:
/H12012External router for inbound traffic
/H12012Firewall for outbound traffic
Configure firewalls to look for potentially malicious behavior over time
(such as the number of packets received in a certain period of time), andhave rules in place to cut off attacks if a certain threshold is reached,such as 100 port scans in one minute.
Most firewalls, IDSs, and IDPs detect port scanning and cut it off in real
time. Figure 9-4 shows an example: A basic Nmap OS fingerprint scanwas detected and cut off (hence the black slash) by ISS’s BlackICE per-sonal firewall and IDP product in real time.
Figure 9-3:
In-depth
port-
scanning
options in
NMapWin.127 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 127
--- Page 151 ---
Gathering network information
NetScanTools Pro is a great tool for general network information, such as the
number of unique IP addresses, NetBIOS names, and MAC addresses found.
The following report is an example of the NetScanner (network scanner)
output of NetScanTools Pro 2000:
Statistics for NetScanner
Scan completion time = Sat, 7 Feb 2004 14:11:08Start IP address: 192.168.1.1End IP address: 192.168.1.254Number of target IP addresses: 254Number of IP addresses responding to pings: 13Number of IP addresses sent pings: 254Number of intermediate routers responding to pings: 0Number of successful NetBIOS queries: 13Number of IP addresses sent NetBIOS queries: 254Number of MAC addresses obtained by NetBIOS queries: 13Number of successful Subnet Mask queries: 0Number of IP addresses sent Subnet Mask queries: 254
Number of successful Whois queries: 254
Traffic denial
Deny ICMP traffic to specific hosts you’re trying to protect. Most hosts don’t
need to have ICMP enabled — especially inbound ICMP requests — unlessit’s needed for a network management system that monitors hosts using thisprotocol.
You canbreak applications on your network, so make sure that you analyze
what’s going on, and understand how applications and protocols are working,
before you disable such network traffic as ICMP.
Figure 9-4:
BlackICE
logs
showing
how an
Nmap scan
was cut off.128 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 128
--- Page 152 ---
SNMP scanning
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) is a protocol built into virtu-
ally every network device. Network management programs (such as HPOpenView and LANDesk) use SNMP for remote network host management.Unfortunately, SNMP also presents security vulnerabilities.
Vulnerabilities
The problem is that most network hosts run SNMP that isn’t hardened orpatched to prevent known security vulnerabilities. The majority of networkdevices have SNMP enabled and don’t even need it!
If SNMP is compromised, a hacker can gather such network information as
ARP tables and TCP connections to attack your systems. If SNMP shows upin port scans, you can bet that a hacker will try to compromise the system.Figure 9-5 shows how GFI LANguard determined the NetWare version running(Version 6, Service Pack 3) by simply querying a host running unprotectedSNMP. Here are some other utilities for SNMP enumeration:
/H12012The commercial tool SolarWinds (
www.solarwinds.net )
/H12012Free Windows GUI-based Getif ( www.wtcs.org/snmp4tpc/getif.htm )
/H12012Text-based SNMPUTIL for Windows ( www.wtcs.org/snmp4tpc/FILES/
Tools/SNMPUTIL/SNMPUTIL.zip )
Countermeasures
Preventing SNMP attacks can be as simple as A-B-C:
/H12012Always disable SNMP on hosts if you’re not using it — period.
/H12012Block the SNMP port (UDP port 161) at the network perimeter.
/H12012Change the default SNMP community string from public to another value
that’s more difficult to guess. This makes SNMP harder to hack.
Figure 9-5:
Information
gathered by
querying a
vulnerable
SNMP host.129 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 129
--- Page 153 ---
Banner grabbing
Banners are the welcome screens that divulge software version numbers and
other host information to a network host. This banner information may iden-tify the operating system, the version number, and the specific service packs,so hackers know possible vulnerabilities. You can grab banners by usingeither plain old telnet or Netcat.
telnet
You can telnet to hosts on the default telnet port (TCP port 23) to see whetheryou’re presented with a login prompt or any other information. Just enter thefollowing line at the command prompt in Windows or UNIX:
telnet ip_address
You can telnet to other commonly used ports with these commands:
/H12012SMTP:
telnet ip_address 25
/H12012HTTP:
telnet ip_address 80
/H12012POP3:
telnet ip_address 110
Figure 9-6 shows specific version information about an Exchange 2003 serverwhen telnetting to it on port 25.
Netcat
Netcat can grab banner information from routers and other network hosts,such as a wireless access point or managed Ethernet switch.
The following steps bring back information about a host that runs a Web
server for remote management purposes:
Figure 9-6:
Information
gathered
about
Exchange
2003 via
telnet.130 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 130
--- Page 154 ---
1. Enter the following line to initiate a connection on port 80:
nc –v ip_address 80
2. Wait for the initial connection.
Netcat returns the message hostname [ ip_address ] 80 (http) open .
3. Enter the following line to grab the home page of the Web server:
GET / HTTP/1.0
4. Press Enter a couple of times to load the page.
Figure 9-7 shows some typical results with Netcat.
Countermeasures
The following steps can reduce the chance of banner-grabbing attacks:
/H12012If there is no business need for services that offer banner information,
disable those unused services on the network host.
/H12012If there is no business need for the default banners, or if you can cus-tomize the banners displayed, configure the network host’s applicationor operating system to either disable the banners or remove informationfrom the banners that could give an attacker a leg up.
If you can customize your banners, check with your lawyer about adding awarning message similar to this:
Warning!!! This is a private system. All use is monitored and recorded. Anyunauthorized use of this system may result in civil and/or criminal prosecu-tion to the fullest extent of the law.
Firewall rules
As part of your ethical hacking, you can test your firewall rules to make surethey’re working like they’re supposed to.
Figure 9-7:
A Web-
server
banner
grab using
Netcat.131 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 131
--- Page 155 ---
Testing
A few tests can verify that your firewall actually does what it says it’s doing.
You can connect through it on the ports you believe are open, but what aboutall the other ports that can be open and shouldn’t be?
Some security-assessment tools can not only test for open ports, but also
determine whether traffic is actually allowed to pass through the firewall.
All-in-one tools
All-in-one tools aren’t perfect, but their broad testing capabilities make thenetwork scanning process a lot less painful and can save you tons of time!Their reporting is really nice, too, especially if you will show your test resultsto upper management.
Nessus, QualysGuard, and GFI LANguard Network Security Scanner provide
similar results. Figure 9-8 is partial output from LANguard. It identifies openports on the test network and presents information on SNMP, operating-systeminformation, and special alerts to look for.
You can use LANguard Network Security Scanner and QualysGuard to find
operating-system vulnerabilities and patches that need to be applied. Prettyslick! I show you more on this in Chapter 11, which covers Windows.
Netcat
Netcat can test certain firewall rules without having to test a productionsystem directly. For example, you can check whether the firewall allows port23 (telnet) through. Follow these steps to see whether a connection can bemade through port 23:
1. Load Netcat on a client machine inside the network.
This allows you to test from the inside out.
Figure 9-8:
Information
gathered
from a
network
scan using
LANguard
Network
Security
Scanner.132 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 132
--- Page 156 ---
2. Load Netcat on a testing computer outside the firewall.
This allows you to test from the outside in.
3. Enter the Netcat listener command on the client (internal) machine
with the port number you’re testing.
For example, if you’re testing port 23, enter this command:
nc –l –p 23 cmd.exe
4. Enter the Netcat command to initiate an inbound session on the test-
ing (external) machine. You must include the following information:
• The IP address of the internal machine you’re testing• The port number you’re testing
For example, if the IP address of the internal (client) machine is
10.11.12.2 and the port is 23, enter this command:
nc –v 10.11.12.2 23
If Netcat presents you with a new command prompt (that’s what the cmd.exe
is for in Step 3) on the external machine, it means that you connected and arenow executing commands on the internal machine! This can serve severalpurposes, including testing firewall rules and — well, uhhhmmm — executingcommands on a remote system!
Alternative testing tools
These utilities test firewall rules more robustly than Netcat:
/H12012Firewalk: A UNIX-based tool ( www.packetfactory.net/firewalk )
/H12012Firewall Informer: A commercial tool by BLADE Software ( www.
blade-software.com )
Countermeasures
The following countermeasures can prevent a hacker from testing your firewall:
/H12012Limit traffic to what’s needed.
Set rules on your firewall (and router, if needed) to pass only traffic that
you absolutely must pass. For example, have rules in place that allowHTTP inbound to an internal Web server and outbound for external Webaccess.
This is the best defense against someone poking at your firewall.
/H12012Block ICMP to help prevent abuse from some automated tools, such as
Firewalk.
/H12012Enable stateful packet inspection on the firewall, if you can. It can blockunsolicited requests.133 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 133
--- Page 157 ---
Looking through a network analyzer
A network analyzer is a tool that allows you to look into a network and ana-
lyze data going across the wire for network optimization, security, and/ortroubleshooting purposes. Like a microscope for a lab scientist, a networkanalyzer is a must-have tool for any security professional.
Network analyzers are often generically referred to as sniffers, though that’s
actually the name and trademark of a specific product from Network
Associates, Sniffer (the original network-analysis tool).
A network analyzer is handy for sniffing packets. Watch for the following net-
work traffic behavior:
/H12012What do packet replies look like? Are they coming from the host you’retesting or from an intermediary device?
/H12012Do packets appear to traverse a network host or security device, suchas a router, a firewall, IDS, or a proxy server?
When assessing security and responding to security incidents, a network ana-lyzer can help you
/H12012View anomalous network traffic and even track down an intruder.
/H12012Develop a baseline of network activity and performance before a secu-rity incident occurs, such as protocols in use, usage trends, and MACaddresses.
When your network behaves erratically, a network analyzer can help you
• Track and isolate malicious network usage• Detect malicious Trojan-horse applications• Monitor and track down DoS attacks
You can use one of the following programs for network analysis:
/H12012EtherPeek by WildPackets (
www.wildpackets.com ) is my favorite
network analyzer. It delivers a ton of features that the higher-end
network analyzers of yesterday have for a fraction of their cost.EtherPeek is available for the Windows operating systems.
/H12012I download the open-source Ethereal network analyzer from 
www.
ethereal.org if I need a quick fix and don’t have my laptop nearby.
It’s not as user-friendly as EtherPeek, but it is very powerful if you’rewilling to learn its ins and outs. Ethereal is available for both Windowsand UNIX-based operating systems.134 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 134
--- Page 158 ---
/H12012Two other powerful and free utilities can perform such functions as
network analysis:
• ettercap ( ettercap.sourceforge.net ) for Windows and UNIX-
based operating systems. I cover ettercap in more detail in “ARPspoofing,” later in the chapter.
• dsniff (
www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff ) for UNIX-based
operating systems.
A network analyzer is just software running on a computer with a networkcard. It works by placing the network card in promiscuous mode, which enables
the card to see all the traffic on the network, even traffic not destined to thenetwork-analyzer host. The network analyzer performs the following functions:
/H12012Captures all network traffic
/H12012Interprets or decodes what is found into a human-readable format
/H12012Displays it all in chronological order
Here are a few caveats for using a network analyzer:
/H12012To capture all traffic, you must connect the analyzer to either
• A hub on the network
• A monitor/span/mirror port on a switch
/H12012You should connect the network analyzer to a hub on the outside of the
firewall, as shown in Figure 9-9, as part of your testing so you can seetraffic similar to what a network-based IDS sees:
• What’s entering your network before the firewall filters eliminates
the junk traffic
• What’s leaving your network after the traffic goes past the firewall
Internet
LAN
Network analyzer
computerFirewallRouter
Ethernet HubFigure 9-9:
Connecting
a network
analyzer
outside the
firewall.135 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 135
--- Page 159 ---
Whether you connect your network analyzer inside or outside your firewall,
you see immediate results. It can be an overwhelming amount of information,but you can look for these issues first:
/H12012Odd traffic, such as
• Unusual amount of ICMP packets
• Excessive amounts of multicast or broadcast traffic• Packet types that don’t belong, such as NetBIOS in a NetWare
environment
/H12012Internet usage habits, which can help point out malicious behavior of a
rogue insider or system that has been compromised, such as
• Web surfing
• E-mail•I M
/H12012Questionable usage, such as
• Many lost or oversized packets• High bandwidth consumption that may point to a Web or FTP
server that doesn’t belong
/H12012Reconnaissance probes and system profiling from port scanners and 
vulnerability-assessment tools, such as a significant amount of inboundtraffic from unknown hosts — especially over ports that are not usedvery much, such as FTP or telnet.
/H12012Hacking in progress, such as tons of inbound UDP or ICMP echorequests, SYN floods, or excessive broadcasts.
/H12012Nonstandard host names on your network. For example, if your systemsare named Computer1, Computer2, and so on, a computer namedGEEKz4evUR should raise a red flag.
/H12012Hidden servers (especially Web, SMTP, FTP, and DHCP) that may beeating network bandwidth or serving illegal software or even access intoyour network hosts.
/H12012Attacks on specific applications that show such commands as 
/bin/rm ,
/bin/ls , echo , and cmd.exe .
You may need to let your network analyzer run for quite a while — severalhours to several days, depending on what you’re looking for.
Before getting started, configure your network analyzer to capture and store
the most relevant data:
/H12012If your network analyzer permits it, configure your network analyzersoftware to use a first-in, first-out buffer.136 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 136
--- Page 160 ---
This overwrites the oldest data when the buffer fills up, but it may be
your only option if memory and hard drive space are limited on yournetwork-analysis computer.
/H12012If your network analyzer permits it, record all the traffic into a capturefile, and save it to the hard drive. This is the ideal scenario — especiallyif you have a large hard drive, such as 50GB or more.
You can easily fill a several-gigabyte hard drive in a short period of time.
/H12012When network traffic doesn’t look right in a network analyzer, it proba-
bly isn’t. It’s better to be safe than sorry.
Run a baseline when your network is working normally. You can see any
obvious abnormalities when an attack occurs.
Clear-as-day decoding makes a network analyzer worth every penny youmay pay.
Figure 9-10 shows what a Smurf DoS attack can do to a network in just 30
seconds. (I created this attack with BLADE Software’s IDS Informer, but youcan use other tools.) On a small network with very little traffic, the utilizationnumber is 823 kilobits/second — not too large a number for a 100-megabit/second Ethernet network. However, on a busy network with a lot more traffic,the number would be staggering.
Figure 9-11 shows the Smurf DoS attack on EtherPeek’s conversation monitor.
Three million bytes were transmitted in this short period of time — fromone host.
Figure 9-12 shows what a WANRemote backdoor remote administration
tool (RAT) looks like across the network using EtherPeek. It shows the com-mands sent to get files from the local C: drive, kill UNIX processes, and unload
X-Window.
Figure 9-10:
What a
Smurf DoS
attack looks
like through
a network
analyzer.137 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 137
--- Page 161 ---
If one workstation consumes considerably more bandwidth than the others —
such as the 10.11.12.203 host in Figure 9-13 — dig deeper to see what’s goingon. (Such network hosts as servers often send and receive more traffic thanother hosts.)
Figure 9-14 shows an indication that a port scan is being run on the network.
It shows all the different protocols and the small number of packets this analy-sis found, including Gnutella, telnet, and rlogin.
Figure 9-13:
Higher-
than-normal
network
usage (as
shown
by the
10.11.12.203
host).
Figure 9-12:
WANRemote
RAT-attack
traffic.
Figure 9-11:
A Smurf
DoS
conversa-
tion via
EtherPeek.138 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 138
--- Page 162 ---
Check your network for a high number of ARP requests and ICMP echo
requests proportionate to your overall traffic, as shown in Figure 9-15.
Countermeasures
A network analyzer can be used for good or evil. All these tests can be usedagainst you, too. A few countermeasures can help prevent someone fromusing an unauthorized network analyzer, but there’s no way to completelyprevent it.
If hackers can connect to your network (physical or wireless), they can cap-
ture packets on the network, even if you’re using a switch.
Figure 9-15:
Abnormally
high ICMP
and ARP
requests
show
potential
malicious
behavior.
Figure 9-14:
Many
nonstandard
protocols
can indicate
that a port
scan is
taking
place.139 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 139
--- Page 163 ---
Physical security
Ensure that adequate physical security is in place to prevent a hacker from
plugging into your network:
/H12012Keep the bad guys out of your server room and wiring closet.
A special monitor port on a switch where a hacker can plug in a network
analyzer is especially sensitive. Make sure it’s extra secure.
/H12012Make sure that such unsupervised areas as unoccupied desks don’thave live network connections.
Network-analyzer detection
You can use a network- or host-based utility to determine if someone is run-ning an unauthorized network analyzer on your network:
/H12012sniffdet (
sniffdet.sourceforge.net ) for UNIX-based systems
/H12012PromiscDetect ( ntsecurity.nu/toolbox/promiscdetect ) for
Windows
These tools enable you to monitor the network for Ethernet cards that arerunning in promiscuous mode. You simply load the programs on your com-puter, and the programs alert you if they see promiscuous behaviors on thenetwork (sniffdet) or local system (PromiscDetect).
The MAC-daddy attack
Attackers can use ARP (Address Resolution Protocol) running on your net-work to make their systems appear to be either your system or anotherauthorized host on your network.
ARP spoofing
An excessive amount of ARP requests can be a sign of an ARP poisoning
attack (or ARP spoofing ) on your network.
What happens is that a client running a program such as the UNIX-baseddsniff or the UNIX- and DOS/Windows-based ettercap can change the ARPtables — the tables that store IP addresses to media access control (MAC)
mappings — on network hosts. This causes the victim computers to thinkthey need to send traffic to the attacker’s computer, rather than the true des-tination computer, when communicating on the network. This is often referredto as a Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack.
This security vulnerability is inherent in how TCP/IP communications are
handled.140 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 140
--- Page 164 ---
Here’s a typical ARP spoofing attack with a hacker’s computer (Hacky) and
two legitimate network users’ computers (Joe and Bob):
1. Hacky poisons the ARP caches of victims Joe and Bob by using dsniff,
ettercap, or a utility he wrote.
2. Joe associates Hacky’s MAC address with Bob’s IP address.
3. Bob associates Hacky’s MAC address with Joe’s IP address.4. Joe’s traffic and Bob’s traffic are sent to Hacky’s IP address first.5. Hacky’s network analyzer captures Joe’s traffic and Bob’s traffic.
If Hacky is configured to act like a router and forward packets, it forwards
the traffic to its original destination. The original sender and receivernever know the difference!
Figure 9-16 shows the juicy e-mail stuff I found with ettercap. I loaded ettercapon my Windows computer, selected 10.11.12.204 as the source and 10.11.12.2as the destination, and used ARP poisoning. Voilà!
Spoofed ARP replies can be sent to a switch very quickly, which often crashes
the switch. The switch reverts to broadcast mode, which makes it work like a
hub. When this occurs, an attacker can sniff every packet going through theswitch without bothering with ARP spoofing.
MAC-address spoofing
MAC-address spoofing tricks the switch into thinking you (actually, your com-
puter) are someone else. You simply change your MAC address and masquer-ade as another user.
You can use this trick to test such access control systems as your IDS, fire-
wall, and even operating-system login controls that check for specific MACaddresses.
Figure 9-16:
A sample
of what
hackers
can find
with ARP
poisoning.141 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 141
--- Page 165 ---
UNIX-based systems
In UNIX and Linux, you can spoof MAC addresses with the ifconfig utility.
Follow these steps:
1. While logged in as root, use ifconfig to enter a command that disables
the network interface. Insert the network interface number that youwant to disable (usually, eth0) into the command, like this:
[root@localhost root]# ifconfig eth0 down
2. Enter a command for the MAC address you want to use.
Insert the fake MAC address and the network interface number (eth0)into the command again, like this:
[root@localhost root]# ifconfig eth0 hw ether new_mac_address
You can use a more feature-rich utility called MAC Changer ( www.alobbs.
com/macchanger ) for Linux systems.
Windows
You can use regedit to edit the Windows Registry, but I like using a neatWindows utility called SMAC (
www.klcconsulting.net/smac ), which makes
MAC spoofing a simple process. Follow these steps to use SMAC:
1. Load the program.
2. Select the adapter for which you want to change the MAC address.3. Enter the new MAC address in the New Spoofed MAC Address fields,
and click Update MAC.
4. Stop and restart the network card with these steps:
i. Right-click the network card in Network and Dialup Connections.
ii. Select Disable, and then right-click again and click Enable for the
change to take effect.You may have to reboot for this to work properly.
5. Click Refresh in the SMAC interface.
You should see something similar to the SMAC screen capture in 
Figure 9-17.
To reverse Registry changes with SMAC, follow these steps:
1. Select the adapter for which you want to change the MAC address.
2. Click Remove MAC.142 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 142
--- Page 166 ---
3. Stop and restart the network card with these steps:
i. Right-click the network card in Network and Dialup Connections.
ii. Select Disable, and then right-click again and click Enable for the
change to take effect.
You may have to reboot for this to work properly.
4. Click Refresh in the SMAC interface.
You should see your original MAC address again.
Countermeasures
A few countermeasures on your network can minimize the effects of a hacker
attack against ARP and MAC addresses on your network.
Prevention
You can prevent MAC-address spoofing if your switches can enable port secu-rity to prevent automatic changes to the switch MAC address tables.
No realistic countermeasures for ARP poisoning exist. The only way to prevent
ARP poisoning is to create and maintain static ARP entries in your switches forevery host on the network. This is definitely something that no network admin-istrator has time to do!
Detection
You can detect these two types of hacks through either an IDS or a stand-aloneMAC address monitoring utility.
Figure 9-17:
SMAC
showing a
spoofed
MAC
address.143 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 143
--- Page 167 ---
Arpwatch is a UNIX-based program alerts you via e-mail if it detects changes
in MAC addresses associated with specific IP addresses on the network.
Denial of service
Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks are among the most common hacker attacks. A
hacker initiates so many invalid requests to a network host that it uses all itsresources responding to them and ignores legitimate requests.
DoS attacks
The following types of DoS attacks are possible against your network andhosts, and can cause systems to crash, data to be lost, and every user tojump on your case, wondering when Internet access will be restored.
Individual attacks
Here are some common DoS attacks:
/H12012SYN floods: The attacker literally floods a host with TCP SYN packets.
/H12012Ping of Death: The attacker sends IP packets that exceed the maximum
length of 65,535 bytes, which can ultimately crash the TCP/IP stack onmany operating systems.
/H12012WinNuke: This attack can disable networking on older Windows 95 and
NT computers.
Distributed attacks
Distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks have an exponentially greater impact on their
victims. The most famous was the DDoS attack against eBay, Yahoo!, CNN,and dozens of other Web sites by the hacker known as MafiaBoy. These aresome common distributed attacks:
/H12012Smurf attack: An attacker spoofs the victim’s address and sends ICMP
echo request (ping packets) to the broadcast address. The victim com-puter gets deluged with tons of packets in response to those echorequests.
/H12012Trinoo and Tribe Flood Network (TFN) attacks: Sets of client- and
server-based programs launch packet floods against a victim machine,effectively overloading it and causing it to crash.
DoS attacks can be carried out with tools that the hacker either writes ordownloads off the Internet. These are good tools to test your network’sIDS/IDP and firewalls. You can find programs that allow actual attacks andprograms, such as BLADE Software’s IDS Informer, that let you send con-trolled attacks.144 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 144
--- Page 168 ---
Testing
Your first DoS test should be a search for DoS vulnerabilities from a port-
scanning and network-analysis perspective.
Don’t test for DoS unless you have test systems or can perform controlled
tests with the proper tools. Poorly planned DoS testing is a job search in themaking. It’s like trying to delete data from a network share remotely andhoping that the access controls in place are going to prevent it.
Countermeasures
Most DoS attacks are difficult to predict, but they can be easy to prevent:
/H12012Test and apply security patches as soon as possible for such networkhosts as routers and firewalls, as well as for server and workstationoperating systems.
/H12012Use IDS and IDP systems to monitor regularly for DoS attacks.
You can run a network analyzer in continuous capture mode if you can’t
justify the cost of an all-out IDS or IDP solution.
/H12012Configure firewalls and routers to block malformed traffic. You can do
this only if your systems support it, so refer to your administrator’sguide for details.
/H12012Minimize IP spoofing by either
• Using authentication and encryption, such as a Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI)
• Filtering out external packets that appear to come from an internal
address, the local host (127.0.0.1), or any other private and non-routable address such as 10.x.x.x, 172.16.x.x–172.31.x.x, or192.168.x.x
/H12012Block all ICMP traffic inbound to your network unless you specificallyneed it. Even then, you should allow it only in to specific hosts.
/H12012Disable all unneeded TCP/UDP small services (such as echo and chargen).
Establish a baseline of your network protocols and traffic patterns before aDoS attack occurs. That way, you know what to look for. And periodicallyscan for such potential DoS vulnerabilities as rogue DoS software installed onnetwork hosts.
Work with a minimum necessary mentality when configuring your network
devices such as firewalls and routers:
/H12012Identify traffic that is necessary for approved network usage.
/H12012Allow the traffic that’s needed.
/H12012Deny all other traffic.145 Chapter 9: Network Infrastructure14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 145
--- Page 169 ---
General network defenses
Regardless of the specific attacks against your system, a few good practices
can help prevent many network problems:
/H12012Stateful inspection on firewalls. This can help ensure that all traffic tra-versing it is legitimate and can prevent DoS attacks and other spoofingattacks.
/H12012Rules to perform packet filtering based on traffic type, TCP/UDP ports,IP addresses, and even specific interfaces on your routers before thetraffic is ever allowed to enter your network.
/H12012Proxy filtering and Network Address Translation (NAT).
/H12012Finding and eliminating fragmented packets entering your network (fromFraggle or other type of attack) via an IDS or IDP system.
/H12012Segmenting and firewalling these network segments:
• The internal network in general
• Critical departments, such as accounting, finance, HR, and
research146 Part III: Network Hacking 14 55784x Ch09.qxd  3/29/04  4:15 PM  Page 146
--- Page 170 ---
Chapter 10
Wireless LANs
In This Chapter
/H17075Understanding risks of wireless LANs
/H17075Selecting wireless LAN hacking tools
/H17075Hacking against wireless LANs
/H17075Minimizing wireless network security risks
Wireless local area networks (WLANs) — specifically, the ones based on
the IEEE 802.11 standard — are increasingly being deployed into both
business and home networks. Next to instant messaging and personal videorecorders, WLANs are the neatest technology I’ve used in quite a while. Ofcourse, with any new technology come security issues, and WLANs are noexception. In fact, the 802.11b wireless technology has been the poster childfor weak security and network hack attacks for several years running.
WLANs offer a ton of business value, from convenience to reduced network
deployment time. Whether your organization allows wireless network accessor not, testing for WLAN security vulnerabilities is critical. In this chapter, Icover some common wireless network security vulnerabilities that you shouldtest for. And I discuss some cheap and easy countermeasures you can imple-ment to help ensure that WLANs are not more of a risk to your organizationthan they’re worth.
Understanding the Implications of
Wireless Network Vulnerabilities
WLANs are very susceptible to hacker attacks — even more so than wired
networks are (discussed in Chapter 9). They have vulnerabilities that canallow a hacker to bring your network to its knees and allow your informationto be gleaned right out of thin air. If a hacker comprises your WLAN, you canexperience the following problems:15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 147
--- Page 171 ---
/H12012Loss of network access, including e-mail, Web, and other services that
can cause business downtime
/H12012Loss of confidential information, including passwords, customer data,intellectual property, and more
/H12012Legal liabilities associated with unauthorized users
Most of the wireless vulnerabilities are in the 802.11 protocol and within wire-less access points (APs) — the central hublike devices that allow wireless
clients to connect to the network. Wireless clients have some vulnerabilitiesas well.
Various fixes have come along in recent years to address these vulnerabili-
ties, but most of these fixes have not been applied or are not enabled bydefault. You may also have employees installing rogue WLAN equipment onyour network without your knowledge; this is the most serious threat to yourwireless security and a difficult one to fight off. Even when WLANs are hard-ened and all the latest patches have been applied, you still may have someserious security problems, such as DoS and man-in-the-middle attacks (likeyou have on wired networks), that will likely be around for a while.
Choosing Your Tools
Several great WLAN security tools are available for both the Windows andUNIX platforms. The UNIX tools — which mostly run on Linux and BSD — canbe a bear to configure and run properly if the planets and stars are not prop-erly aligned. The PC Card services in Linux are the trickiest to set up, depend-ing on your type of WLAN card and your Linux version.
Don’t get me wrong — the UNIX-based tools are excellent at what they do.
Programs such as Kismet (
www.kismetwireless.net ), AirSnort ( airsnort.
shmoo.com ), AirJack ( 802.11ninja.net/airjack ), and Wellenreiter ( www.
wellenreiter.net ) offer many features that most Windows-based applica-
tions don’t have. These programs run really well if you have all the Linuxdependencies installed. They also offer many features that you don’t needwhen assessing the security of your WLAN.
In the spirit of keeping things simple, the tests I outline in this chapter require
only Windows-based utilities. My favorite tools for assessing wireless tools inWindows are as follows:
/H12012NetStumbler (
www.netstumbler.com ) for AP discovery and enumeration
/H12012Wireless client management software — such as Orinoco’s Client Managersoftware — for AP discovery and enumeration148 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 148
--- Page 172 ---
/H12012WildPackets’ AiroPeek ( www.wildpackets.com ) or your favorite WLAN
analyzer for detailed information on wireless hosts, decryption of
encrypted traffic, and more
/H12012LANguard Network Security Scanner ( www.gfi.com ) for WLAN enumera-
tion and vulnerability scanning149 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs
A case study with Matt Caldwell 
on hacking wireless networks
Matt Caldwell, shared with me a wild story of awireless warflying experience — yes, it’swardriving, but in an airplane! Here’s hisaccount of what happened.
The SituationMr. Caldwell’s employer — the state of
Georgia — wanted to ha ve the state’s wireless
networks assessed. The problem with terrestrialwardriving is that it’s very slow, so Mr. Caldwelland his team conducted an experiment to deter-mine the most economical way to assess theaccess points across the state of Georgia, whichcomprised 47,000 employees and 70 agencies.They knew the location of the buildings andknew they had to visit all of them. As a test, theydrove around one building to count the numberof access points they detected and concludedthat it would take almost six months to assess allthe state buildings.
In his spare time, Mr. Caldwell flies single-
engine aircraft, and he decided that if the mili-tary could gather intelligence via aircraft, socould he! After getting through some politicalred tape, he and a fellow aviator used duct tapeto mount an antenna on a Cessna 172RG (hethanks MacGyver for this idea!). He mountedthe antenna at a 90-degree angle from theplane’s nose so that he could make notes on thedirection of the plot point. By doing some simplemath, plus 90 degrees gave them radial on theapproximate bearing of the target access point.The Outcome
As Mr. Caldwell and his colleague climbed
above 500 feet, NetStumbler (the wirelessassessment software they were using) beganchiming over the engine noise with its “bongs.”It seemed like every second, a new wireless APwas being discovered. They made their wayaround downtown Atlanta and detected over300 unique APs at about 2,000 feet AGL. Theyproved that warflying can be an effectivemethod of detecting access points and a greatstatistical-gathering activity. They collecteddata on 382 APs in less than one hour in the air!
Matt Caldwell’s Lessons Learned
/H12012Don’t eat a McDonald’s double cheese-
burger before flying — or at least carry abarf bag!
/H12012Use extra duct tape and a safety rope, orput the antenna in the aircraft.
/H12012Use good software to do triangulation soyou don’t have to calculate the positionmanually.
/H12012Seventy percent of the APs detected had noWEP encryption!
/H12012Almost 50 percent of the APs detected haddefault SSIDs.
Matt Caldwell, CISSP , is founder of and chiefsecurity officer for GuardedNet, Inc.15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 149
--- Page 173 ---
You also need the proper hardware. A good setup I’ve used is a laptop PC
with an Orinoco (formerly made by Lucent, now Proxim) 802.11b PC Card.This card is not only compatible with NetStumbler, but also has an antennaconnector that allows you to connect an external antenna. Another bonus isthat most wireless security tools are very friendly with the Orinoco card. Alot of security tool support is available for the Prism2 chipset found in wire-less cards by Belkin, D-Link, Linksys, and more. Before you purchase a wire-less PC Card or PCI adapter, verify what chipset it has to ensure compatibilitywith the majority of security tools. The SeattleWireless HardwareComparisonpage (
www.seattlewireless.net/index.cgi/HardwareComparison ) is a
good reference for this type of information.
You can also use a handheld wireless security testing device such as an
AirMagnet ( www.airmagnet.com ) or the Fluke WaveRunner ( www.fluke
networks.com ). Both devices have their own built-in programs that are
great for testing security settings on your WLAN.
An external antenna is also something to consider as part of your arsenal. I
have had good luck running tests without an antenna, but your mileage mayvary. If you’re performing a walk-through of your facilities to test for wirelesssignals, for example, adding an additional antenna increases your odds offinding legitimate — and, more important, unauthorized APs. You can chooseamong three main types of wireless antennas:
/H12012Omnidirectional: Transmits and receives wireless signals 360 degrees
over shorter distances, such as in boardrooms or reception areas. Theseantennas, also known as dipoles, typically come installed on APs fromthe factory.
/H12012Semidirectional: Transmits and receives directionally focused wireless
signals over medium distances, such as down corridors and across oneside of an office.
/H12012Directional: Transmits and receives highly focused wireless signals over
long distances, such as between buildings. This antenna, also knownas a high-gain antenna, is the antenna of choice for wireless hackers dri-ving around cities looking for vulnerable APs — an act also known aswardriving.
As an alternative to the antennas described in the preceding list, you can use anifty Pringles-can design. If you’re interested in trying this, check out the articleat 
www.oreillynet.com/cs/weblog/view/wlg/448 for details. You can even
try other alternatives, such as a pork-and-beans can! A simple Internet searchturns up a lot of information on this subject, if you’re interested. One site inparticular sells a Cantenna kit pretty cheaply at 
mywebpages.comcast.net/
hughpep .150 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 150
--- Page 174 ---
Wireless LAN Discovery
After you have an Internet connection, wireless hardware (a wireless card,
at a minimum), and wireless testing software (NetStumbler or similar clientmanagement software, at a minimum), you’re ready to roll.
Checking for worldwide recognition
The first test requires only the MAC address of your AP and access to theInternet. You’re testing to see if someone has discovered your WLAN andposted information about it for the world to see. If you’re not sure what yourAP’s MAC address is, you should be able to view it by using the 
arp -a com-
mand in DOS. You may have to ping the access point’s IP address first so theMAC address is loaded into your ARP cache. Figure 10-1 shows what this maylook like.
After you have the AP’s MAC address, browse to the WiGLE database of WLANs
(
www.wigle.net ) to see if your AP is listed. You have to register with the site
to perform a database query, but it’s worth it. After you select the Query linkand login, you see a screen similar to Figure 10-2. You can enter such AP infor-mation as geographical coordinates, but the simplest thing to do is enter yourMAC address in the format shown.
If your AP is listed, that means that someone has discovered it — most likely
via wardriving — and has posted the information for others to see. You needto start implementing the security countermeasures listed in this chapter assoon as possible to keep others from using this information against you! Youcan also check 
www.wifimaps.com to see if your AP is listed at another
WLAN lookup site.
Figure 10-1:
Finding
the MAC
address
of an AP
using arp .151 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 151
--- Page 175 ---
Scanning your local airwaves
Monitor the airwaves around your building to see what authorized and unau-
thorized APs you can find. You’re looking for the SSID (service set identifier),which is your WLAN’s name. If you have multiple WLANs, each one has a net-work SSID associated with it.
Here’s where NetStumbler comes into play. NetStumbler can discover SSIDs
and other detailed information about wireless APs, including the following:
/H12012MAC address
/H12012Name
/H12012Radio channel in use
/H12012Vendor name
/H12012Whether encryption is on or off
/H12012RF signal strength (signal-to-noise ratio)
Figure 10-2:
Searching
for your
wireless
APs using
the WiGLE
database.152 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 152
--- Page 176 ---
Figure 10-3 shows an example of what you might see when running
NetStumbler in your environment. The information that you see here is whatothers can see. NetStumbler and most other tools work by sending a probe-request signal from the client. Any APs within signal range must respond towith their SSIDs — that is, if they’re configured to broadcast their SSIDs.
Kismet — the popular wireless sniffer (network analyzer) for Linux and BSD
UNIX — looks not only for probe responses from APs like NetStumbler does,but also for other 802.11 management packets, such as association responsesand beacons. This allows Kismet to detect the presence of a WLAN even whenprobe-response packets are disabled in the AP — something that NetStumblercan’t do.
When you’re using certain wireless security assessment tools, including
NetStumbler and AiroPeek, your adapter may be put in passive monitoringmode. This means you can no longer communicate with other wireless hostsor APs while the program is loaded. Also, some programs require a specializeddriver for your wireless card that often disables normal WLAN functionality. Ifthis is the case, you need to roll back (reinstall) the original adapter’s driver(supplied by the vendor) to restore the standard functions of your adapter.
The best way to search for APs that are not broadcasting their SSIDs 
from within Windows is to use a WLAN analyzer such as AiroPeek (myfavorite) — which is the sister product of the excellent wired network ana-lyzer EtherPeek — or TamoSoft’s CommView for Wi-Fi (
www.tamos.com/
products/commwifi ), which I’ve heard great things about. You can do this
by enabling a capture filter on 802.11 management packets, as shown inAiroPeek’s options in Figure 10-4.
An ad-hoc mode — a peer-to-peer type setup — in WLANs can allow wireless
clients to communicate directly with one another without having to passthrough an AP. These types of WLANs operate outside the normal wirelesssecurity controls and, thus, can cause serious security issues above andbeyond the normal 802.11 vulnerabilities. The best way to detect these roguenetworks is to use NetStumbler. You can also use a WLAN analyzer or wire-less IDS and search for beacon packets where the ESS field is not equal to 1.
Figure 10-3:
NetStumbler
displays
detailed
data on APs.153 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 153
--- Page 177 ---
Wireless Network Attacks
Various malicious hacks — including various DoS attacks — can be carried
out against your WLAN. This includes APs that are forced to reveal their SSIDsduring the process of being disassociated from the network and rejoining. Inaddition, hackers can literally jam the RF signal of an AP — especially in802.11b and 802.11g systems — and force the wireless clients to reassociateto a rogue AP masquerading as the victim AP. Hackers can create man-in-the-middle attacks by maliciously using tools such as ESSID-jack and monkey-jackand can flood your network with thousands of packets per second by mali-ciously using packet-generation tools such as Gspoof or LANforge — enoughto bring the network to its knees. Even more so than with wired networks, thistype of DoS attack is practically impossible to prevent on WLANs.
Various hacking tools for the UNIX platform can perform these types of hacks,
including Cqure AP, HostAP, and AirJack. After hackers carry out these typesof attacks against your WLAN, they can attempt to capture traffic and pene-trate into any systems that attach to it.
You can carry out several — nonmalicious — attacks against your WLAN. The
associated countermeasures help protect your network from these vulnera-bilities, as well as from the malicious attacks previously mentioned. Whentesting your WLAN security, look out for the following weaknesses:
/H12012Unencrypted wireless traffic
/H12012Unauthorized APs
Figure 10-4:
AiroPeek
detects APs
that don’t
broadcast
SSIDs.154 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 154
--- Page 178 ---
/H12012RF signals that are too strong
/H12012Wireless equipment that’s easy to access physically
/H12012Default configuration settings
A good starting point for testing is to attempt to attach to your WLAN as an
outsider and run a vulnerability-assessment tool, such as LANguard NetworkSecurity Scanner. This test enables you to see what others can see on yournetwork, including information on the OS version, open ports on your AP, andeven network shares on wireless clients. Figure 10-5 shows the type of infor-mation that can be revealed about an AP on your network.
Encrypted traffic
Wireless traffic can be captured directly out of the airwaves, making this com-munications medium susceptible to malicious eavesdropping. Unless the trafficis encrypted, it’s sent and received in cleartext just like on a standard wirednetwork. On top of that, the 802.11 encryption protocol, Wired EquivalentPrivacy (WEP), has its own weakness that allows hackers to crack the encryp-tion keys and decrypt the captured traffic. This vulnerability has helped putWLANs on the map — so to speak.
WEP, in a certain sense, actually lives up to its name: It provides the privacy
equivalent to that of a wired network and then some. However, it was notintended to be cracked so easily. WEP uses a fairly strong symmetric (shared-key) encryption algorithm called RC4. Hackers can observe encrypted wirelesstraffic and recover the WEP key due to a flaw in how the RC4 initialization
Figure 10-5:
A LANguard
scan of a
potentially
vulnerable
AP .155 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 155
--- Page 179 ---
vector (IV) is implemented in the protocol. This weakness is due to the fact
that the IV is only 24 bits long, which causes it to be repeated every 16.7 mil-lion packets — even sooner in many cases, based on the amount of wirelessclients entering and leaving the network.
Most WEP implementations initialize WLAN hardware with an IV of 0 and
increment it by one for each packet sent. This can lead to the IV’s being reinitialized — started over at 0 — approximately every five hours. Giventhis, WLANs that have a small number of clients transmitting a relativelysmall rate of wireless packets are normally more secure than large WLANsthat transmit a lot of wireless data.
Using various UNIX-based tools such as WEPCrack (
wepcrack.
sourceforge.net ), AirSnort ( airsnort.shmoo.com ), and WepAttack
(wepattack.sourceforge.net ), hackers need to collect only a few hours’
up to a few days’ (depending on how much wireless traffic is on the network)
worth of packets to be able to break the WEP key.
A longer key length, such as 128 bit or 192 bit, doesn’t make WEP exponentially
more difficult to crack. This is because WEP’s static key scheduling algorithmrequires only that about 20,000 or so additional packets be captured to cracka key for every extra bit in the key length.
Although WEP is crackable, it’s still much better than no encryption at all.
Similar to the effect that home-security-system signs have on would-be homeintruders, a wireless LAN running WEP is not nearly as attractive to a hackeras one without it. The hacker is likely to just move on to easier targets.
You can carry out this attack against your network, but it probably won’t
prove anything other than WEP is vulnerable. After you implement the WEPcountermeasures mentioned in the next section, you can always run some ofthe WEP cracking tools to ensure that the countermeasures are working.
If you need to use your WLAN analyzer to view traffic as part of your security
assessment, you won’t be able to see any traffic if WEP is enabled unless youknow your WEP key. You can enter your key into your analyzer, but justremember that hackers can do the same thing if they’re able to crack yourWEP key using one of the tools I mention earlier!
Figure 10-6 shows an example of how you can view protocols on your WLAN
by entering your WEP key into AiroPeek via the 802.11 tab in the CaptureOptions window before you start your packet capture.
Countermeasures
The simplest solution to the WEP problem is to use a VPN for all wireless com-munications. You can easily implement this in a Windows environment — for156 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 156
--- Page 180 ---
free — by enabling PPTP for client communications. You can also use the
IPSec support built into Windows, as well as SSH, SSL/TLS, and other propri-etary vendor solutions, to keep your traffic secure.
Newer 802.11-based solutions exist as well. If you can configure your wireless
hosts to regenerate a new key dynamically after a certain number of packetshave been sent, the WEP vulnerability can’t be exploited. Many AP vendorshave already implemented this fix as a separate configuration option, so checkfor the latest firmware with features to manage key rotation. For instance, theproprietary Cisco LEAP protocol uses per-user WEP keys that offer a layer ofprotection if you’re running Cisco hardware.
The wireless industry has come up with a solution to the WEP problem called
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA). WPA uses the Temporal Key Integrity Protocol(TKIP) encryption system, which fixes all the known WEP issues. WPA requiresan 802.1x authentication server, such as a RADIUS server, to manage useraccounts for the WLAN. Check with your vendor for WPA updates.
A forthcoming 802.11i standard from the IEEE integrates the WPA fixes and
more. This standard is an improvement over WPA but is not compatible witholder 802.11b hardware, due to its implementation of the Advanced EncryptionStandard (AES) for encryption. The workaround for this is to use TKIP, which isbackward-compatible with older hardware because it uses the RC4 encryptionscheme. Keep an eye out for 802.11i support for your wireless hardware.
Figure 10-6:
Using
AiroPeek
Client
Manager to
search for
rogue APs.157 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 157
--- Page 181 ---
Rogue networks
Watch out for unauthorized APs and wireless clients attached to your net-
work that are running in ad-hoc mode.
Using NetStumbler or your client manager software, you can test for APs that
don’t belong on your network. You can also use the network monitoring fea-tures in a WLAN analyzer such as AiroPeek.
Look for the following rogue AP characteristics:
/H12012Odd SSIDs, including the popular default ones linksys, tsunami, comcom-
com, and wireless.
/H12012Odd AP system names — that is, the name of the AP if your hardware
supports this feature — not to be confused with the SSID.
/H12012MAC addresses that don’t belong on your network. Look at the firstthree bytes of the MAC address (the first six numbers), which specifythe vendor name. You can perform a MAC-address vendor lookup at
coffer.com/mac_find to find information on APs you’re unsure of.
/H12012Weak radio signals, which can indicate that an AP has been hidden awayor is on the outside of your building.
/H12012Communications across a different radio channel than what your net-work communicates on.
/H12012A degradation in network throughput for any WLAN client.
Figure 10-7 shows how you can use AiroPeek’s Monitor utility to spot an oddnetwork host (the NETGEAR system) when you have a Cisco Aironet-only net-work, or vice versa.
My test network for this example is small compared to what you might see,
but you get the idea of how an odd system can stand out.
Don’t rely solely on this method. Hackers can spoof their MAC addresses,
making them look like Cisco Aironet systems that belong on your network.
Walk around your building or campus to perform this test to see what you
can find. Physically look for devices that don’t belong — a well-placed AP orWLAN client that’s turned off won’t show up in your network analysis tools.Search near the outskirts of the building or near any publicly accessibleareas. Scope out boardrooms and the offices of upper-level managers for anyunauthorized devices. These are places that are typically off-limits but oftenare used as locations for hackers to set up rogue APs.158 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 158
--- Page 182 ---
WLANs authenticate the wireless devices, not the users. Hackers can use this
to their advantage by gaining access to a wireless client via remote-accesssoftware such as telnet or SSH or by exploiting a known application or OS vul-nerability. After they’re able to do that, they potentially have full access toyour network.
Countermeasures
The only way to detect rogue APs and hosts on your network is to monitoryour WLAN proactively, looking for indicators that wireless clients or rogueAPs might exist. But if rogue APs or clients don’t show up in NetStumbler orin your client manager software, that doesn’t mean you’re off the hook. Youmay also need to break out the WLAN analyzer, wireless IDS, or other net-work management application.
You can enable MAC-address filtering controls on your AP so that wireless
clients must have an authorized MAC address before being allowed to con-nect. The problem with this countermeasure is that hackers can easily spoofMAC addresses in UNIX by using the 
ifconfig command and in Windows
with the SMAC utility, as I describe in Chapter 9. However like WEP, MAC-address-based access controls are another layer of protection and betterthan nothing at all. If a hacker spoofs one of your MAC addresses, the onlyway to detect malicious behavior is to spot the same MAC address beingused in two or more places on the WLAN.
You may be able to make a couple of configuration changes — depending on
your AP — to keep hackers from carrying out these tests against you:
/H12012If possible, increase your wireless beacon broadcast interval to the max-imum setting, which is around 65,535 milliseconds (roughly 66 seconds).This can help hide the AP from hackers who are wardriving or walkingby your building quickly.
Figure 10-7:
Using
AiroPeek’s
Monitor to
spot a
product that
doesn’t
belong.159 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 159
--- Page 183 ---
/H12012Disable probe responses to prevent your AP from responding to
NetStumbler requests.
Use personal firewall software such as BlackICE — my favorite — ( blackice.
iss.net ) or ZoneAlarm ( www.zonelabs.com ) on all client computers to pre-
vent unauthorized remote access to your network.
Physical-security problems
Various physical-security vulnerabilities can result in physical theft, thereconfiguration of wireless devices, and the capturing of confidential informa-tion. You should look for the following security vulnerabilities when testingyour systems:
/H12012APs mounted on the outside of a building and accessible to the public.
/H12012Poorly mounted antennas — or the wrong types of antennas — thatbroadcast too strong a signal and that are accessible to the public.You can view the signal strength in NetStumbler or your wireless clientmanager.
These issues are often overlooked due to rushed installations, improper plan-ning, and lack of technical knowledge, but they can come back to haunt youlater.
Countermeasures
Secure APs, antennas, and other equipment in secure closets, ceilings, orother places that are difficult for a would-be intruder to access physically.Terminate your APs outside any firewall or other network perimeter securitydevices — or at least in a DMZ — whenever possible. If you place the wirelessequipment inside your secure network, it can negate any benefits you wouldget out of your perimeter security devices.
If wireless signals are propagating outside your building where they don’t
belong, either
/H12012Turn down the transmit power setting of your AP.
/H12012Use a smaller or different antenna (semidirectional or directional) todecrease the signal.
Some basic planning helps prevent these vulnerabilities.160 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 160
--- Page 184 ---
Vulnerable wireless workstations
Wireless workstations have tons of security vulnerabilities — from weak
passwords to unpatched security holes to the storage of WEP keys locally.One serious vulnerability is for wireless clients using the Orinoco wirelesscard. The Orinoco Client Manager software stores encrypted WEP keys in theWindows Registry — even for multiple networks — as shown in Figure 10-8.
You can crack the key by using the Lucent Orinoco Registry Encryption/
Decryption program found at 
www.cqure.net/tools.jsp?id=3 . Make sure
that you use the -dcommand-line switch and put quotes around the encrypted
key, as shown in Figure 10-9. This program comes in handy if you forget whatyour key is, but it can be used against you as well.
If hackers remotely access a workstation via the Connect Network Registry in
regedit, they can obtain these keys, crack them, and be on your network in ajiffy.
Countermeasures
You can implement the following countermeasures on your workstations tokeep them from used as entry points into your WLAN.
Figure 10-9:
Cracking a
WEP key
with Lucent
Orinoco.
Figure 10-8:
Encrypted
WEP key of
a wireless
card.161 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 161
--- Page 185 ---
/H12012Regularly perform vulnerability assessments on your wireless worksta-
tions, as well as your other network hosts.
/H12012Apply the latest vendor security patches and enforce strong user passwords.
/H12012Use personal firewalls on these systems to keep malicious intruders offof those systems and out of your network.
/H12012Install antivirus software.
/H12012Consider installing an antispyware application such as PestPatrol.
Default configuration settings
Similar to wireless workstations, wireless APs have many known vulnerabili-ties. The most common ones are default SSIDs and admin passwords. Themore specific ones occur only on certain hardware and software versionsthat are posted in vulnerability databases and vendor Web sites.
The one vulnerability that stands out above all others is that certain APs,
including Linksys, D-Link, and more, are susceptible to a vulnerability thatexposes any WEP key(s), MAC-address filters, and even the admin password!All that hackers have to do to exploit this is to send a broadcast packet onUDP port 27155 with a string of 
gstsearch .
To test for this vulnerability, you can use a program called pong. This pro-gram sends the broadcast packet automatically and returns any informationit discovers. To run pong, follow these steps:
1. Download the program from 
www.mobileaccess.de/wlan/dl.php/
pong_v1.1.zip .
2. Unzip the program to c:\wireless (or a similar directory).
3. Drop out to a DOS prompt, and enter pong .
If pong returns no answer, as shown in Figure 10-10, you’re safe. Otherwise,
look out!
Figure 10-10:
The results
you should
get from
pong.162 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 162
--- Page 186 ---
Countermeasures
You can implement some of the simplest and effective security countermea-
sures for WLANs — and they’re all free:
/H12012Make sure that you change default admin passwords, AP names, andSSIDs.
/H12012Disable SSID broadcasting if you don’t need this feature. Figure 10-11shows the SSID setting for a Cisco Aironet AP.
/H12012Disable SNMP if you’re not using it.
/H12012Apply the latest firmware patches for your APs and WLAN cards. Thiscountermeasure helps to prevent various vulnerabilities, including theUDP broadcast exploit. If you find that it doesn’t, consider using anothervendor’s wireless products.
Figure 10-11:
Cisco
Aironet
setting to
disable
SSID
broadcasts.163 Chapter 10: Wireless LANs15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 163
--- Page 187 ---
164 Part III: Network Hacking 15 55784x Ch10.qxd  3/29/04  4:14 PM  Page 164
--- Page 188 ---
Part IV
Operating System
Hacking 16 55784X PP04.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 165
--- Page 189 ---
In this part . . .
Now that you’re past the network level, it’s time to
get down to the nitty-gritty — those fun operating
systems you use on a daily basis and have come to bothlove and hate. There’s deﬁnitely not enough room in thisbook to cover every operating system version or evenevery operating system vulnerability, but I certainly hitthe important parts — especially the ones that aren’teasily ﬁxed with patches.
This part starts out by looking at the most widely used
(and picked on) operating system — Microsoft Windows.From Windows NT to Windows Server 2003, I show yousome of the best ways to attack and secure these operat-ing systems from the bad guys. This part then takes a lookat Linux and its less publicized yet still major securityﬂaws. Many of the hacks and countermeasures I cover canapply to many other ﬂavors of UNIX as well. This part thenmoves on to the tried-and-true Novell NetWare operatingsystem — perhaps the most secure in this lineup but stillnot vulnerability-free as many Novell die-hards like tobelieve. I cover the major issues along with solid counter-measures you can implement to keep your mighty Novellboxes secure and still mostly reboot-free.16 55784X PP04.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 166
--- Page 190 ---
Chapter 11
Windows
In This Chapter
/H17075Port scanning a Windows server
/H17075Gleaning Windows information without logging in
/H17075Exploiting common vulnerabilities when logged into Windows
/H17075Minimizing Windows security risks
The Microsoft Windows OS family (with such versions as NT, 2000, XP, and
Server 2003) is the most widely used OS in the world. It’s also the most
widely hacked. Is this because Microsoft doesn’t care as much about securityas other OS vendors? The short answer is no.Sure, numerous security flaws
were overlooked — especially in the Windows NT days — but becauseMicrosoft products are so pervasive throughout networks, Microsoft is theeasiest vendor to pick on, and often it’s Microsoft products that end up in thecrosshairs of hackers. This is the same reason that you see so many vulnera-bility alerts on Microsoft products. The one positive about hackers is thatthey’re driving the requirement for better security!
Many security flaws in the headlines aren’t new. They’re variants of vulnera-
bilities that have been around for a long time in UNIX and Linux, such as theRPC vulnerabilities that the Blaster worm used. You’ve heard the saying “themore things change, the more they stay the same.” That applies here, too.Most Windows attacks are prevented if the patches were properly applied.Thus, poor security management is often the real reason Windows attacksare successful, yet Microsoft takes the blame and must carry the burden.
In addition to the password attacks I cover in Chapter 7 and some of the mal-
ware attacks I cover in Chapter 14, many other attacks are possible against aWindows-based system. Tons of information can be gleaned from Windowsby simply connecting to the system across a network and using tools to pullthe information out. Many of these tests don’t even require you to be authen-ticated to the remote system. All hackers need is a Windows computer with adefault configuration that’s not protected by such measures as a firewall.17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 167
--- Page 191 ---
When you start poking around on your network, you may be surprised at
how many of your Windows-based computers have security vulnerabilities.After you connect to a Windows system and have a valid user name and pass-word (by either knowing it or deriving it from using the password crackingtechniques in Chapter 7), you can test other aspects of Windows security.
This chapter shows you how to test for some of the most critical attacks
against the Windows OS family and outlines countermeasures to make sureyour systems are secure.
Windows Vulnerabilities
Given the general ease of use of Windows, its enterprise-ready ActiveDirectory service, and the feature-rich .NET development platform, manyorganizations have moved to the Microsoft platform for their networkingneeds. Many businesses — especially the small to medium-sized ones —depend solely on the Windows OS for network usage. Many large organiza-tions run critical servers such as Web servers and database servers on theWindows platform. If security vulnerabilities aren’t addressed and managedproperly, they can bring a network or an entire organization to its knees.
When Windows and other Microsoft software are attacked — especially by a
widespread Internet-based worm or virus — hundreds of thousands of orga-nizations and millions of computers are affected. Many well-known attacksagainst Windows can lead to
/H12012Leakage of confidential information, including files being copied andcredit card numbers being stolen
/H12012Passwords being cracked and used to carry out other attacks
/H12012Systems taken completely offline by DoS attacks
/H12012Entire databases being corrupted or deleted
When insecure Windows-based systems are attacked, serious things canhappen to a tremendous amount of computers around the world.
Choosing Tools
Thousands of Windows hacking and testing tools are available. The key is tofind a set of tools that can do what you need and that you’re comfortableusing.168 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 168
--- Page 192 ---
Many security tools — including some of the tools in this chapter — aren’t
designed for Windows Server 2003 and newer operating systems but workwith them. However, the program documentation sometimes isn’t updated toreflect its compatibility. The most recent version of each tool in this chapteris compatible with Windows NT, 2000, and Server 2003.
The more security tools and other power user applications you install in
Windows — especially programs that tie into the network drivers and TCP/IPstack — the more unstable Windows becomes. I’m talking about slow perfor-mance, blue screens of death, and general instability issues. Unfortunately,often the only fix is to reinstall Windows and all your applications. I’ve had torebuild my system once during the writing of this book and a total of threetimes in the past year. Ah, the memories of those DOS and Windows 3. xdays
when things were much simpler!
Essential tools
Every Windows security tester needs these special tools:
/H12012Nmap (www.insecure.org ) for UDP and other types of port scanning
Nmap is an excellent tool for OS fingerprinting.
/H12012Vision (www.foundstone.com ) for mapping applications to TCP/UDP
ports
Free Microsoft tools
You can use the following Windows programs and free security tools thatMicrosoft provides to test your systems for various security weaknesses.
/H12012Built-in Windows programs (Windows 9xand later versions) for NetBIOS
and TCP/UDP service enumeration:
• nbtstat for gathering NetBIOS name table information
• netstat for displaying open ports on the local Windows system• net for running various network based commands including view-
ing of shares on remote Windows systems
/H12012Microsoft Baseline Security Analyzer 
www.microsoft.com/technet/
security/tools/mbsahome.asp for testing for missing patches and
basic Windows security settings.169 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 169
--- Page 193 ---
/H12012Windows Resource Kits (including some tools that are free for download
at www.microsoft.com ) for security and OS management. 
You can get specific details about Resource Kit books published byMicrosoft Press at 
www.microsoft.com/learning .
All-in-one assessment tools
The following tools perform a wide variety of security tests including
/H12012Port scanning
/H12012OS fingerprinting
/H12012Basic password cracking
/H12012Detailed vulnerability mappings of the various security weaknesses thetools find on your Windows systems
I recommend any of these comprehensive sets of tools:
/H12012LANguard Network Security Scanner (
www.gfi.com ) 
/H12012QualysGuard ( www.qualys.com )
QualysGuard has very detailed and accurate vulnerability testing.
/H12012Nessus (www.nessus.org )
Task-specific tools
The following tools perform one or two specific tasks. These tools providedetailed security assessments of your Windows systems and insight that youmay not otherwise get from all-in-one assessment tools:
/H12012SuperScan (
www.foundstone.com ) for TCP port scanning and ping
sweeps.
/H12012A tool for enumerating Windows security settings. Given the enhancedsecurity of Windows Server 2003, these tools can’t connect and enumer-ate a default install of Windows Server 2003 system like a Windows 2000or NT system — but you can use these tools nonetheless. It’s a goodidea to test for vulnerable “non-default” configurations in case thesecure default settings have been changed.
To gather such information as security policies, local user accounts, and
shares, your decision may be based on your preferred interface:170 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 170
--- Page 194 ---
• Winfo (www.ntsecurity.nu/toolbox/winfo ) runs from the
Windows command line.
• DumpSec ( www.somarsoft.com ) runs from a graphical Windows
interface.
• Walksam ( razor.bindview.com/tools/files/rpctools-1.0.
zip) runs from the Windows command line.
If you’re scanning a network only for Windows shares, consider Legion
(packetstormsecurity.nl/groups/rhino9/legionv21.zip ).
/H12012Rpcdump ( razor.bindview.com/tools/files/rpctools-1.0.zip )
for enumerating RPC ports to search for running applications.
/H12012Network Users ( www.optimumx.com/download/netusers.zip ) for
gathering Windows login information.
Information Gathering
When you assess Windows vulnerabilities, start by scanning your computersto see what the bad guys can see.
The hacks in this chapter are against the versions of the Windows Server OS
(NT, 2000, and Server 2003) from inside a firewall. Unless I point out otherwise,all the tests in this chapter can be run against all versions of the Windowsserver OS. The attacks in this chapter are significant enough to warrant test-ing for regardless of your current setup. Your results may vary from minedepending on these factors:
/H12012OS versions
/H12012Security measures, such as patch levels and access controls (such asfirewall policies and local Windows security policies) 
System scanning
A few straightforward processes can identify weaknesses. Other steps canminimize your vulnerability.
Testing
Start gathering information about your Windows systems by running an ini-tial port scan:171 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 171
--- Page 195 ---
1. Run basic scans to find which ports are open on each Windows system:
• Scan for TCP ports with a port scanning tool, such as SuperScan or
Nmap.
• Scan for UDP ports with a port scanning tool, such as Nmap.
2. Perform OS enumeration (such as scanning for shares and specific OS
versions) by using an all-in-one assessment tool, such as LANguard
Network Security Scanner.
3. Scan your Windows systems for open ports that could point to poten-
tial security vulnerabilities. 
The tool you use depends on whether you need a basic summary of vul-
nerable ports or a comprehensive system report:
• If you need a basic summary of open ports, scan your Windows
systems with SuperScan.
The SuperScan results in Figure 11-1 show several potentially vul-
nerable ports open on a Windows Server 2003 system, includingthose for SMTP (port 25), a Web server (port 80), RPC (port 135),and the ever popular — and easily hacked — NetBIOS (ports 139and 445). 
• If you need a comprehensive system report, scan your Windows
systems with LANguard Network Security Scanner.
In Figure 11-2, LANguard shows the server version (identified as
Windows XP initially and then later as Windows 2003), the system’scurrent date and time setting and system uptime, and the server’sdomain (PL).
Figure 11-1:
Scanning a
Windows
Server 2003
system with
SuperScan.172 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 172
--- Page 196 ---
4. You can run Nmap with the -Ooption to confirm the OS characteris-
tics — the version information referred to as the OS fingerprint —
that you found with your scanning tool, as shown in Figure 11-3.
A hacker can use this information to determine potential vulnerabilities
for your system. Make sure you’ve applied the latest patches and systemhardening best practices.
In Figure 11-3, Nmap reports the OS version as Windows .NET Enterprise
Server — the original name of Windows Server 2003.
Countermeasures
You can prevent a hacker from gathering certain information about yourWindows systems by implementing the proper security settings on your net-work and on the Windows hosts themselves.
Figure 11-3:
Using Nmap
to determine
the
Windows
version. 
Figure 11-2:
Gathering
system
details with
LANguard
Network
Security
Scanner.173 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 173
--- Page 197 ---
Information
If you don’t want anyone gathering information about your Windows systems,
you have two options:
/H12012Protect Windows with either of these countermeasures:
• A firewall that blocks the Windows-specific ports for RPC (port
135) and NetBIOS (ports 137–139 and 445)
• An intrusion prevention system, such as the host-based BlackICE
software
/H12012Disable unnecessary services so that they don’t appear when a connec-tion is made
Fingerprinting
You can prevent OS fingerprinting tests by either
/H12012Using a host-based intrusion prevention system
/H12012Denying all inbound traffic with a firewall — this just may not be practi-cal for your needs
NetBIOS 
You can gather Windows information by poking around with NetBIOS(Network Basic Input/Output System) functions and programs. NetBIOSallows applications to make networking calls and communicate with otherhosts within a LAN.
These Windows NetBIOS ports can be compromised if they’re not properly
secured:
/H12012UDP ports for network browsing:
• Port 137 (NetBIOS name services) 
• Port 138 (NetBIOS datagram services)
/H12012TCP ports for Server Message Block (SMB): 
• Port 139 (NetBIOS session services)• Port 445 (runs SMB over TCP/IP without NetBIOS)
Windows NT doesn’t support port 445. 174 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 174
--- Page 198 ---
Hacks
The following hacks can be carried out on unprotected systems running
NetBIOS.
Unauthenticated enumeration
When you’re performing your unauthenticated tests, you can gather configu-ration information about the local or remote systems with either
/H12012All-in-one assessment tools, such as LANguard Network SecurityScanner.
/H12012The nbtstat program that’s built into Windows (nbtstat stands for NetBIOS
over TCP/IP Statistics). Figure 11-4 shows information that you can gatherfrom a Windows Server 2003 system with a simple nbtstat query.
nbtstat shows the remote computer’s NetBIOS name table, which you gatherby using the 
nbtstat -A command. This displays the following information:
/H12012Computer name
/H12012Domain name
/H12012Computer’s MAC address
You may even be able to glean the ID of the currently logged user from aWindows NT or Windows 2000 server.
A GUI utility such as LANguard Network Security Scanner isn’t necessary to
gather this basic information from a Windows system. The graphical interfaceoffered by commercial software such as this just presents its findings in aprettier fashion!
Figure 11-4:
Using
nbtstat to
gather
critical
Windows
information.175 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 175
--- Page 199 ---
Shares
Windows uses network shares to share out certain folders or drives on the
system so other users can access them across the network. Shares are easy
to set up and work very well. However, they’re often misconfigured, allowinghackers and other unauthorized users to access information they shouldn’tbe able to get to. You can search for Windows network shares by using theLegion tool. This tool scans an entire range of IP addresses looking forWindows shares. It uses the SMB protocol (TCP port 139) to discover theseshares and displays them in a nice graphical fashion sorted by IP address, asshown in Figure 11-5.
The shares displayed in Figure 11-5 are just what hackers are looking for —
especially because the share names give hackers a hint at what type of filesmight be available if they connect to the shares. After hackers discover theseshares, they’re likely to dig a little further to see if they can browse the filesand more within the shares. I cover shares in more detail in the “SharePermissions” section, later in this chapter.
Countermeasures
You can implement the following security countermeasures to minimizeNetBIOS attacks on your Windows systems.
Limit traffic
You can protect your Windows systems from NetBIOS attacks by using somebasic network infrastructure protection systems as well as some generalWindows security best practices:
Figure 11-5:
Using
Legion to
scan your
network for
Windows
shares.176 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 176
--- Page 200 ---
/H12012If possible, the best way to protect Windows-based systems from NetBIOS
attacks is to put them behind a firewall.
A firewall isn’t always effective. If the attack comes from inside the net-
work, a network-perimeter-based firewall won’t help.
/H12012If a perimeter-based firewall won’t suffice, you can protect yourWindows hosts by either
• Installing a personal firewall such as BlackICE
This is the simplest and most secure method of protecting aWindows system from NetBIOS attacks.
• Disabling NetBIOS on your systems.
This often requires disabling Windows file and printer sharing — whichmay not be practical in a network mixed with Windows 2000, NT, and evenWindows 9 xsystems that rely on NetBIOS for file and printer sharing.
Hidden shares — those with a dollar sign ($) appended to the end of theshare name — don’t really help hide the share name. Hackers found out longago that they can easily get around this form of security by obscurity byusing the right methods and tools.
Passwords
If NetBIOS network shares are necessary, make strong passwords mandatory.
With the proper tools, hackers can easily crack NetBIOS passwords across
the network. NetBIOS passwords aren’t case sensitive, so they can be crackedmore easily than case sensitive passwords that require both capital and smallletters. Chapter 7 explains password security in detail.
RPC
Windows uses remote procedure call (RPC) and DCE internal protocols to
/H12012Communicate with applications and other OSs. 
/H12012Execute code remotely over a network.
RPC in Windows uses TCP port 135.
RPC exploits can be carried out against a Windows host — perhaps the best-
known being the Blaster worm that reared its ugly head after a flaw was foundin the Windows RPC implementation.177 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 177
--- Page 201 ---
Enumeration
Hackers use RPC enumeration programs to see what’s running on the host.
With that information, hackers can then penetrate the system further.
Rpcdump is my favorite tool for enumerating RPC on Windows systems. Figure
11-6 shows the abbreviated output of Rpcdump run against a Windows 2000server. Rpcdump found the RPC listeners for MS SQL Server and even a DHCPserver running on this host — and this is a hardened Windows 2000 serverwith all the latest patches running BlackICE intrusion prevention software!
Countermeasures
The appropriate step to prevent RPC enumeration depends on whether yoursystem has network-based applications, such as Microsoft SQL and MicrosoftOutlook:
/H12012Without network-based applications, the best countermeasure is a fire-wall that blocks access to RPC services (TCP port 135). 
This firewall may disable network-based applications.
/H12012If you have network-based applications, one of these options can reduce
the risk of RPC enumeration:
• If highly critical systems such as Web or database servers need
access only from trusted systems, give only trusted systemsaccess to TCP port 135.
• If your critical systems must be made accessible to the public,
make sure your RPC-based applications are patched and config-ured to run as securely as possible.
Don’t try to disable the RPC server within Windows with such “fixes” asRegistry hacks. You may end up with a Windows server or applications thatstop working on the network, forcing you to reinstall and reconfigure thesystem.
Figure 11-6:
Rpcdump
shows RPC-
based
services. 178 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 178
--- Page 202 ---
Null Sessions 
A well-known vulnerability within Windows can map an anonymous connection
(null session) to a hidden share called IPC$ (interprocess communication). This
attack method can be used to 
/H12012Gather Windows host configuration information, such as user IDs andshare names.
/H12012Edit parts of the remote computer’s Registry.
Hacks
Although Windows Server 2003 doesn’t allow null session connections bydefault, Windows 2000 Server and NT Server do — and plenty of those sys-tems are still around to cause problems on most networks.
Windows Server 2003 and Windows XP at the desktop are much more secure
out of the box than their predecessors. Keep this in mind when it comes timeto upgrade your systems.
Mapping
To map a null session, follow these steps for each Windows computer towhich you want to map a null session:
1. Format the basic net command, like this:
net use \\host_name_or_IP_address\ipc$ “” “/user:”
The net command to map null sessions requires these parameters:
•net (the built-in Windows network command) followed by the use
command
• IP address of the system to which you want to map a null 
connection
• A blank password and username
The blanks are why it’s called a nullconnection.
2. Press Enter to make the connection.
Figure 11-7 shows an example of the complete command when mappinga null session. After you map the null session, you should see the mes-sage 
The command completed successfully.179 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 179
--- Page 203 ---
To confirm that the sessions are mapped, enter this command at the com-
mand prompt:
net use
As shown in Figure 11-7, you should see the mappings to the IPC$ share oneach computer to which you’re connected.
Gleaning information
With a null session connection, you can use other utilities to remotelygather critical Windows information. Dozens of tools can gather this typeof information. 
You — like a hacker — can take the output of these enumeration programs
and attempt (as an unauthorized user) to try such gleaning of information as
/H12012Cracking the passwords of the users found. (See Chapter 7 for more onpassword cracking.)
/H12012Mapping drives to the network shares.
You can use the following applications for system enumeration against serverversions of Windows prior to Server 2003.
Windows Server 2003 is much more secure than its predecessors against
such system enumeration vulnerabilities as null session attacks. If the serveris in its default configuration, it should be secure; however, you should per-form these tests against your Windows Server 2003 systems to be sure.
net view
The net view command shows shares that the Windows host has available.
You can use the output of this program to see information that the server isadvertising to the world and what can be done with it, such as:
Figure 11-7:
Mapping
a null
session to a
Windows
2000 server.180 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 180
--- Page 204 ---
/H12012Share information that a hacker can use to attack your systems, such as
mapping drives and cracking share passwords.
/H12012Share permissions that may need to be removed, such as the permissionfor the Everyone group to at least see the share on Windows NT and2000 systems.
To run net view, enter the following at a command prompt:
net view
Figure 11-8 shows an example.
Configuration and user information
Winfo and DumpSec can gather useful information about users and configura-tion, such as
/H12012Windows domain to which the system belongs
/H12012Security policy settings
/H12012Local usernames
/H12012Drive shares
Your preference may depend on whether you like graphical interfaces or acommand line:
/H12012Winfo (
www.ntsecurity.nu/toolbox/winfo ) is a command-line tool. 
Because Winfo is a command-line tool, you can create batch (script) filesthat automate the enumeration process. The following is an abbreviatedversion of Winfo’s output of a Windows NT server, but you can glean thesame information from a Windows 2000 server:
Winfo 2.0 - copyright (c) 1999-2003, Arne Vidstrom
- http://www.ntsecurity.nu/toolbox/winfo/
SYSTEM INFORMATION:
Figure 11-8:
net view
displays
drive shares
on a remote
Windows
host.181 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 181
--- Page 205 ---
- OS version: 4.0
PASSWORD POLICY:
- Time between end of logon time and forced logoff: No forced logoff
- Maximum password age: 42 days- Minimum password age: 0 days- Password history length: 0 passwords- Minimum password length: 0 characters
USER ACCOUNTS:
* Administrator
(This account is the built-in administrator account)
* doctorx* Guest
(This account is the built-in guest account)
* IUSR_WINNT* kbeaver* nikki
SHARES:
* ADMIN$
- Type: Special share reserved for IPC or administrative share
* IPC$
- Type: Unknown
* Here2Bhacked
- Type: Disk drive
* C$
- Type: Special share reserved for IPC or administrative share
* Finance
- Type: Disk drive
* HR
- Type: Disk drive
This information cannot be gleaned from Windows Server 2003 by
default.
/H12012DumpSec produces Windows configuration and user information in agraphical interface. Figure 11-9 shows the local user accounts on aremote system.
DumpSec can save reports as delimited files that can be imported into
another application (such as a spreadsheet) when you create your final
reports. You can peruse the information for user IDs that don’t belongon your system, such as 
• Ex-employee accounts
• Potential backdoor accounts that a hacker may have created
If hackers get this information, they can attempt to exploit potential
weak passwords and log in as those users.182 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 182
--- Page 206 ---
Walksam
Walksam gleans information about Windows users by walking the SAM data-
base through an established null session. Figure 11-10 is an example of itsoutput. This output is obviously similar to the DumpSec output, but the maindifference here is that this attack can be scripted to somewhat automate theprocess.
Network Users
Network Users ( www.optimumx.com/download/netusers.zip ) can show
who has logged into a remote Windows computer. You can see such informa-tion as 
/H12012Abused account privileges
/H12012Users currently logged into the system
Figure 11-11 shows the history of local logins of a remote Windows 2000workstation.
Figure 11-11:
The
Network
Users tool.
Figure 11-10:
User
information
gathered
with
Walksam.
Figure 11-9:
DumpSec
displays
users on a
server.183 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 183
--- Page 207 ---
This information can help you track who’s logging into a system for auditing
purposes. Unfortunately, this information can be useful for hackers whenthey’re trying to figure out what user IDs are available to crack. They mayeven determine the system’s daily use if the user IDs are descriptive, suchasbackup (for a backup server) or devuser (for a development server).
Countermeasures
You can easily prevent null session connection hacks by implementing one ormore of the following security measures.
Secure versions
If it makes good business sense and the timing is right, upgrade to the moresecure Windows Server 2003. It doesn’t have these vulnerabilities by default.
Blocking NetBIOS
It’s absolutely critical that you block NetBIOS on systems that don’t need toadvertise to the world that it’s running and available to be hacked.
/H12012Block NetBIOS on your Windows server by preventing these TCP portsfrom passing through your network firewall or personal firewall:
• 139 (NetBIOS sessions services)
• 445 (runs SMB over TCP/IP without NetBIOS)
Windows NT doesn’t support port 445. 
Although Windows Server 2003 does not have the same null session vul-
nerability by default as older versions of Windows server operating sys-tems, it’s still a good idea to block NetBIOS ports on these systems.
/H12012Disable File and Print Sharing for Microsoft Networks in the Propertiestab of the machine’s network connection.
Registry
For Windows NT and 2000, you can eliminate this vulnerability by changingthe Windows Registry. Depending on the Windows version, you can selectone of these security settings:
/H12012None: This is the default setting.
/H12012Rely on Default Permissions (Setting 0): This setting allows the default
null session connections.184 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 184
--- Page 208 ---
/H12012Do Not Allow Enumeration of SAM Accounts and Shares (Setting 1):
This is the medium security level setting. This setting still allows nullsessions to be mapped to IPC$, enabling tools such as Walksam to beable to glean information from the system.
/H12012No Access without Explicit Anonymous Permissions (Setting 2): This
high security setting prevents null session connections and system enumeration.
The high security setting has a few drawbacks:
• High security creates problems for domain controller communica-
tion and network browsing.
• The high security setting isn’t available in Windows NT.
Microsoft Knowledge Base Article 246261 covers the caveats of using the
high security setting for Restrict Anonymous. It’s available on the Web at
support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=KB;en-us;246261 .
Windows 2000
In Windows 2000, you don’t have to edit the Registry. You can set local securitypolicy in the Local Policies/Security Options of the Local Security Settings. Thesecurity setting is called Additional Restrictions for Anonymous Connections.This setting is referred to as RestrictAnonymous, as shown in Figure 11-12.
Figure 11-12:
Local
security
policy
settings in
Windows
2000 to
prevent null
sessions. 185 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 185
--- Page 209 ---
Windows NT
For Windows NT, follow these steps to change the Registry to disable null
sessions:
1. Run either of the following Registry editing programs in Windows: 
•regedit.exe
•regedt32.exe
2. Make a backup copy of the Registry.
• If you’re using regedit, select Registry/Export Registry File.
• If you’re using regedt32, select Registry/Save Key.
3. Browse to the key HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\
CurrentControlSet\Control\LSA.
4. Right-click in the right window and select New/DWORD Value.5. Enter RestrictAnonymous as the name.
6. Double-click the RestrictAnonymous key and enter 1as the value.
7. Exit the Registry editor (regedit or regedt32).8. Reboot the computer.
The new setting takes effect after the system is rebooted.
Share Permissions
Windows shares — the available network drives that show up when browsing
the network in Network Neighborhood or My Network Places — are often mis-
configured, allowing more people to have access to them than they should.
This is a security vulnerability that can be exploited by the casual browser,but the implications of a hacker gaining unauthorized access to a Windowssystem can result in serious consequences, including the leakage of confiden-tial information and even the deletion of critical files.
Windows defaults
The default share permission depends on the Windows system version.
Windows 2000/NT
When creating shares in Windows NT and 2000, the group Everyone is givenFull Control access in the share by default for all files to 186 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 186
--- Page 210 ---
/H12012Browse files 
/H12012Read files 
/H12012Write files 
Anyone who maps to the IPC$ connection with a null session (as described
in the preceding section “Null Sessions”) is automatically made part of theEveryone group! This means that remote hackers can automatically gainbrowse, read, and write access to a Windows NT or 2000 server if they estab-lish a null session.
If share permissions are misconfigured, hackers on the Internet may gain
access to these shares on an unprotected system and open, create, anddelete files at will!
Windows 2003 Server
In Windows 2003 Server, the Everyone group is given only Read access toshares. This is definitely an improvement over the defaults in Windows 2000and NT, but it’s not the best setting for the utmost security. You still mayhave situations where you don’t even want the Everyone group to have Readaccess to a share.
Testing
Assessing your share permissions is a good way to get an overall view of whocan access what. This testing shows how vulnerable your network shares —and confidential information — can be. You can find shares with default per-missions and unnecessary access rights enabled.
The best test for share permissions that shouldn’t exist is to log in to the
Windows computer and run an enumeration program so you can see who hasaccess to what.
DumpSec
DumpSec shows the share permissions on your servers in a graphical form.You simply connect to the remote computer and select Dump Permissions forShares in the Report menu. This produces shares labeled as unprotected, simi-
lar to what’s shown in Figure 11-13.
This vulnerability exists in both Windows NT and Windows 2000 servers.
Thank goodness Microsoft fixed this default weakness in Windows Server 2003!187 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 187
--- Page 211 ---
LANguard
LANguard Network Security Scanner also shows the share permissions on
your servers in a graphical fashion. Figure 11-14 shows an example.188 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 
Windows workstation security
This chapter focuses on Windows Server OSs(NT, 2000, and Server 2003) with brief mentionsof security issues involving Windows worksta-tion OSs (9 x,Me, and XP). Windows servers are
often the most critical servers on a network, butyou shouldn’t overlook the workstations. 
If you’re running Windows 95, 98, or Me as the
OS for your network workstations, it may betime to upgrade. These three OSs simply aren’tmade for secure networking. Even the olderWindows NT has better security built-in. Why?Because that’s how Microsoft designed it.Windows 9 xand Me were designed for the
casual home user — not for networking in abusiness setting. They support networking suchas domain logins and file and printer sharing,but these security measures are easily circum-vented. Just try pressing Esc on your keyboardthe next time you’re presented with a loginscreen on one of these OSs. The login screenwill go away, and you’ll have full rights onthe system. Your best bet for security andhacker countermeasures is to upgrade theseold OSs — and most likely the hardware, too —to the latest and greatest computers runningWindows XP Professional or newer.
Although Windows XP is much more secure by
default than its older siblings, take a couplemore steps to make it as secure as possible:
/H12012Apply the latest patches as described in thesection “Windows Update” or by using anautomated patch management tool.
/H12012Run LANguard Network Security Scannerand the Microsoft Baseline Security Analyzerto identify any obvious security vulnerabili-ties, such as weak passwords and autologon.
/H12012Enable the Internet Connection Firewall(ICF). This personal firewall provides atremendous amount of security over thestandard configuration. It blocks all unso-licited inbound traffic unless that traffic isexplicitly allowed.
/H12012There are other firewall options as well,such as BlackICE or ZoneAlarm. You maybe able to run both ICF and a third-partyfirewall at the same time, but I don’t rec-ommend it for system operation and stabil-ity purposes.
To enable ICF on a Windows XP Professionalsystem, perform the following steps:
1. Load the Control Panel and then choose
Networking and Internet Connections ➪
Network Connections.
2. Right-click on the network adapter on
which you want to enable ICF and selectProperties.
3. Click the Advanced tab and then select the
Protect My Computer or Network by Limitingor Preventing Access to This Computer fromthe Internet check box.
Supposedly, starting with Windows XP ServicePack 2, ICF will have many more advanced fea-tures such as firewalling being enabled bydefault, boot-time protection of the system, andsupport for various security profiles dependingon how and where the user is logged in.17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 188
--- Page 212 ---
General Security Tests
As part of your ethical hacking, you can run the following security tests to
determine other potential weaknesses in your Windows systems.
Windows Update
Windows Update is the simplest way to check for missing Windows patches —especially critical security updates. How you run Windows Update depends onyour Windows version:
Figure 11-14:
Unprotected
shares in a
remote
Windows
NT server. 
Figure 11-13:
Unprotected
shares in a
Windows
NT system.189 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 189
--- Page 213 ---
/H12012If you have Windows 2000, XP, or Server 2003, run Windows Update from
the Start menu. 
/H12012For Windows NT, browse to windowsupdate.microsoft.com . On that
page, click Scan for Updates to check your system for any missingpatches.
Microsoft has announced plans to stop providing updates for Windows
NT. You can’t assume that Windows Update will have patches for newsecurity vulnerabilities discovered.
Microsoft Baseline Security
Analyzer (MBSA)
Microsoft Baseline Security Analyzer (MBSA) is my preferred method for
checking for missing security patches. MBSA is a free utility from Microsoft.MBSA checks Windows NT, 2000, XP, and Server 2003 systems for missingpatches and also tests Windows, SQL Server, and IIS for such basic securitysettings as weak passwords. You can use these tests to identify securityweaknesses in your systems. Figure 11-15 shows a sample of the security settings MBSA tests.
With MBSA, you can scan either 
/H12012The local system you’re logged into 
/H12012Computers across the network, if your currently logged-in user ID exists
as an Administrator equivalent on the remote system you’re testing
Figure 11-15:
Testing
basic
Windows
security
settings.190 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 190
--- Page 214 ---
MBSA requires an administrator account on the local machines you’re scan-
ning and a manual connection to them.
LANguard
LANguard Network Security Scanner is my favorite feature-rich patch andWindows vulnerability scanning tool. With LANguard, you can 
/H12012Test for vulnerabilities and missing patches
/H12012Deploy patches across the network to remote systems 
Figure 11-16 shows the depth of information that this program can providewhen scanning Windows systems for vulnerabilities and security settings.This type of information is very helpful when testing your own systems —especially if you have a large or complex network.
This information is also very helpful to hackers, especially if they have deter-
mined a local user’s password. This way, they can authenticate to the systemand check to see what patches and security settings are missing.
It seems like no matter how many times you manually check local security
settings and test to ensure that all patches are installed, a program such asLANguard Network Security Scanner or the popular and powerful Hyena(
www.systemtools.com/hyena ) always seems to find security issues you
may have overlooked. This is why I recommend that you include an all-in-oneassessment tool, such as one of these programs, in your security toolbox.
Figure 11-16:
Information
on missing
patches and
weak
security
settings.191 Chapter 11: Windows17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 191
--- Page 215 ---
192 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 17 55784x Ch11.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 192
--- Page 216 ---
Chapter 12
Linux
In This Chapter
/H17075Examining Linux hacking tools
/H17075Port-scanning a Linux server
/H17075Gleaning Linux information without logging in
/H17075Exploiting common vulnerabilities when logged into Linux
/H17075Minimizing Linux security risks
Linux — the new darling competitor to Microsoft — is the latest flavor of
UNIX that has really taken off in corporate networks. A common miscon-
ception is that Windows is the most insecure operating system (OS). However,Linux — and most of its sister variants of UNIX — is prone to the same secu-rity vulnerabilities as any other operating system.
Hackers are attacking Linux in droves because of its popularity and growing
usage in today’s network environment. Because some versions of Linux arefree— in the sense that you don’t have to pay for the base operating system —
many organizations are installing Linux for their Web servers and e-mailservers in hopes of saving money. Linux has grown in popularity for other reasons, including the following:
/H12012Abundant resources available, including books, Web sites, and consul-tant expertise.
/H12012Perception that Linux is more secure than Windows.
/H12012Unlikeliness that Linux will get hit with as many viruses (not necessarilyworms) as Windows and its applications do. This is an area where Linuxexcels when it comes to security, but it probably won’t stay that way.
/H12012Increased buy-in from other UNIX vendors, including IBM and SunMicrosystems. Even Novell is rewriting NetWare to be based on theLinux kernel.
/H12012Growing ease of use.18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 193
--- Page 217 ---
In addition to the password attacks I cover in Chapter 7 and some of the mal-
ware attacks I cover in Chapter 14, many other attacks are possible against aLinux-based system. Linux can be tested remotely without being authenti-cated to the system. With all things being equal (that is, running the latestkernel and having the latest patches applied), it can be more difficult to gleanthe same amount of information from a Linux host than from a Windows orNetWare host without being logged in. After you log in to Linux with a validusername and password, you can glean a lot of information by running secu-rity tests to see how your system might stand up to a malicious internal useror hacker with a valid login.
In this chapter, I show you some critical security issues in the Linux operat-
ing system and outline some countermeasures to plug the holes so you cankeep the bad guys out. A lot of this information applies to all flavors of UNIX.
I demonstrate the vulnerabilities by using Red Hat Linux versions 7.3 and 8.0,
running Linux kernel version 2.4.18. I use Red Hat because it’s the most popu-lar and widely used Linux distribution. It’s also the Linux that I prefer.
Linux Vulnerabilities
Vulnerabilities and hacker attacks against Linux are affecting a growingnumber of organizations — especially e-commerce companies and ISPs thatrely on Linux for many of their systems. When Linux systems are hacked, thevictim organizations can experience the same side effects as if they were run-ning Windows, including:
/H12012Leakage of confidential intellectual property and customer information
/H12012Passwords being cracked
/H12012Systems taken completely offline by DoS attacks
/H12012Corrupted or deleted databases
Choosing Tools
You can use many UNIX-based security tools to test your Linux systems.Some are much better than others. I often find that my Windows-based com-mercial tools do as good a job as any. My favorites are as follows:194 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 194
--- Page 218 ---
/H12012Windows-based SuperScan ( www.foundstone.com ) for ping sweeps and
TCP port scanning
/H12012Nmap (www.insecure.org ) for OS fingerprinting and more detailed port
scanning
/H12012Windows-based LANguard Network Security Scanner ( www.gfi.com ) for
port scanning, OS enumeration, and vulnerability testing
/H12012THC-Amap ( www.thc.org/releases.php ) for application version 
mapping
/H12012Tiger (ftp.debian.org/debian/pool/main/t/tiger ) for automati-
cally assessing local-system security settings
/H12012Linux Security Auditing Tool (LSAT) ( usat.sourceforge.net ) for auto-
matically assessing local-system security settings
/H12012VLAD the Scanner ( razor.bindview.com/tools/vlad ) to test for the
SANS Top 10 Security Vulnerabilities
/H12012QualysGuard ( www.qualys.com ) for OS fingerprinting, port scanning,
and very detailed and accurate vulnerability testing
/H12012Nessus (www.nessus.org ) for OS fingerprinting, port scanning, and vul-
nerability testing
Thousands of other Linux hacking and testing tools are available. The key is
to find a set of tools — preferably as few as possible — that can do the jobthat you need to do and that you feel comfortable working with.
Information Gathering
You can scan your Linux-based systems and gather information from bothoutside (if the system is a publicly accessible host) and inside your network.
Scan from both directions so you see what the bad guys can see from both
outside and inside the network.
System scanning
Linux services — called daemons — are the programs that run on a system
and serve up various applications for users.195 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 195
--- Page 219 ---
/H12012Internet services, such as the Apache Web server (httpd), telnet (telnetd),
and FTP (ftpd), often give away too much information about the system,such as software versions, internal IP addresses, and usernames. Thisinformation can allow a hacker to attack a known weakness in the system.
/H12012TCP and UDP small services such as echo, daytime, and chargen, are
often enabled by default and don’t need to be.
The vulnerabilities inherent in your Linux systems depend on what servicesare running. You can perform basic port scans to glean information aboutwhat’s running.
The SuperScan results in Figure 12-1 show many potentially vulnerable ser-
vices on this Linux system, including RPC, a Web server, telnet, and FTP.
In addition to SuperScan, you can run another scanner, such as Nessus or
LANguard Network Security Scanner, against the system to try to glean moreinformation, including
/H12012A vulnerable version of OpenSSH, as shown in Figure 12-2
/H12012The finger information returned by LANguard, as shown in Figure 12-3
Figure 12-1:
Port-
scanning 
a Linux
server with
SuperScan.196 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 196
--- Page 220 ---
LANguard even determined that the server is running the Berkeley Software
Distribution (BSD) r-services and more in the Alerts section of Figure 12-3. It
Figure 12-3:
LANguard
Network
Security
Scanner
gleaning
user
information
via finger.
Figure 12-2:
Using
Nessus to
discover a
vulnerability
with
OpenSSH.197 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 197
--- Page 221 ---
also displays a description of the potential vulnerability, as well as a link to
the CERT Web site, which contains more information about it. Figure 12-3 alsoshows that LANguard thinks the remote operating system is Red Hat Linux.This information can be handy when you come across unfamiliar open ports.
Figure 12-4 shows various r-services and other daemons that network admin-
istrators are notorious for running unnecessarily on UNIX–based operating
systems. Notice that LANguard points out specific vulnerabilities associatedwith some of the these services, along with a recommendation to use SSH asan alternative.
You can go a step further and find out the exact distribution and kernel ver-
sion by running an OS fingerprint scan using Nmap, as shown in Figure 12-5.
The QualysGuard scan of a Linux server shown in Figure 12-6 outlines threats
to the system in an informative graphic form that nontechie types — the onesto whom you may be showing the results — just love.
Figure 12-5:
Using Nmap
to determine
the OS
kernel
version of 
a Linux
server.
Figure 12-4:
Potentially
vulnerable
r-services
found by
LANguard.198 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 198
--- Page 222 ---
Countermeasures
Although you can’t completely prevent system scanning, you can still imple-
ment the following countermeasures to keep the bad guys from gleaning toomuch information from your systems:
/H12012Protect the systems with either
• A firewall, such as netfilter/iptables (
www.netfilter.org ).
• A host-based intrusion-prevention application, such as PortSentry
(sourceforge.net/projects/sentrytools ) now owned by
Cisco Systems ( www.psionic.com ) or SNARE ( www.intersect
alliance.com/projects/Snare ).
These security systems are the best way to prevent an attacker fromgathering information about your Linux systems.
/H12012Disable the services you don’t need, including RPC and such daemonsas HTTP, FTP, and telnet. You may very well need some of these dae-mons and more — just make sure you have a business need for them.This keeps the services from showing up in a port scan and, thus, givesan attacker less incentive to break into your system.
/H12012Make sure the latest software and patches are loaded; if a hacker deter-mines what you’re running, the chances of exploitation are reduced.
Figure 12-6:
Linux
threats
outlined in a
QualysGuard
scan.199 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 199
--- Page 223 ---
Unneeded Services
When you know which applications are running — such as FTP, telnet, and a
Web server — it’s nice to know exactly which versions are running so youcan look up any of their associated vulnerabilities and decide whether to justturn them off.
Searches
Several security tools can help determine vulnerabilities. These types of utili-ties may not be able to identify all applications down to the exact versionnumber, but they’re a very powerful way of gleaning system information.
Vulnerabilities
Be especially mindful of these known security weaknesses in a system:
/H12012FTP — especially if it’s not properly configured — can provide a way fora hacker to download and access files on your system.
/H12012Telnet is vulnerable to network-analyzer captures of the clear-text userID and password it uses.
/H12012Old versions of sendmail — the world’s most popular e-mail server —have many security issues.
Make sure sendmail is patched and hardened.
/H12012R-services such as rlogin, rdist, rexecd, rsh, and rcp are especially vul-
nerable to hacker attacks, as I discuss in this chapter.
Tools
The following tools can perform more in-depth information gathering beyondport scanning to enumerate your Linux systems and see what the hackers see:
/H12012Nmap can check for specific versions of the services loaded, as shown inFigure 12-7. Simply run Nmap with this command-line switch:
-sV
/H12012Amap is similar to Nmap, but it has a couple of advantages:
• Amap is much faster for these types of scans.
• Amap can detect applications that are configured to run on non-
standard ports, such as Apache running on port 6789 instead of
its default 80.
The output of an Amap scan of the localhost (hence, the 127.0.0.1address) is shown in Figure 12-8. Amap was run with the followingoptions to enumerate some commonly hacked ports:200 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 200
--- Page 224 ---
-1 makes the scan run faster.
-b prints the responses in ASCII characters.
-q skips reporting of closed ports.
21probes port.
22 probes SSH port.
23 probes telnet port.
80 probes HTTP port.
/H12012netstat shows the currently running services on a local machine. Enter
this command:
netstat –anp
/H12012List Open Files (lsof) displays processes that are listening and files thatare open on the system
To run lsof, enter this command at a Linux command prompt:
lsof –i +M
Chapter 14 covers more on usage of lsof as well.
Figure 12-8:
Using Amap
to check
application
versions.
Figure 12-7:
Using Nmap
to check
application
versions.201 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 201
--- Page 225 ---
Countermeasures
You can and should disable the unneeded daemons on your Linux systems.
This is one of the best ways to keep your Linux system secure. It’s like lock-ing the doors and windows in your house — the more you lock, the fewerplaces an intruder can enter.
Disabling unneeded services
The best method of disabling unneeded services depends on how the daemonis being loaded in the first place. There are several places to do this, depend-ing on the version of Linux you’re running.
If you don’t need a service running, take the safe route. Turn it off!
inetd.conf
If it makes good business sense — in other words, you don’t need it — disable
unneeded services by commenting out the loading of daemons you don’t need.Follow these steps:
1. Enter the following command at the command prompt:
ps -aux
The process ID (PID) for each daemon, including inetd, is listed on thescreen. In Figure 12-9, the PID for the sshd (Secure Shell) daemon is 646.
2. Copy the PID for inetd from the screen on a notepad.
3. Open 
/etc/inetd.conf in the Linux text editor vi by entering the fol-
lowing command:
vi /etc/inetd.conf
4. When you have the file loaded in vi, enable the insert (edit) mode by
pressing I.
5. Move the cursor to the beginning of the line of the daemon that you
want to disable, such as httpd (Web server daemon), and type #at the
beginning of the line.This comments out the line and prevents it from loading when you
reboot the server or restart inetd.
6. To exit vi and save your changes, simply press Esc to exit the insert
mode, type :wq, and then press Enter.
This tells vi that you want to write your changes and quit.
7. Restart inetd by entering this command with the inetd PID:
kill –HUP PID202 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 202
--- Page 226 ---
chkconfig
If you don’t have an inetd.conf file, your version of Linux is probably run-
ning xinetd (www.xinetd.org ) — a more secure replacement for inetd — to
listen for incoming network application requests. You can edit the /etc/
xinetd.conf file if this is the case. For more information on the usage of
xinetd and xinetd.conf , enter man xinetd or man xinetd.conf at a Linux
command prompt. If you’re running Red Hat 7.0 or later, you can run the
/sbin/chkconfig program to turn off the daemons you don’t want to load.
For example, you can enter the following to disable the snmp daemon:
chkconfig --del snmpd
You can also enter chkconfig —list at a command prompt to see what ser-
vices are enabled in the xinetd.conf file.
The chkconfig program can be used to disable other services, such as FTP,
telnet, and Web server.
Access control
TCP Wrappers can control access to critical services that you run, such asFTP or HTTP. This program controls access for TCP services and logs theirusage, helping you control access via hostname or IP address and track mali-cious activities.
You can download it from 
www.stanford.edu/group/itss-ccs/security/
unix/tcpwrappers.html .
Figure 12-9:
Viewing the
process IDs
for running
daemons
using 
ps -aux .203 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 203
--- Page 227 ---
.rhosts and hosts.equiv Files
Linux — and all the flavors of UNIX — are very file-based operating systems.
Practically everything that’s done on the system involves the manipulation offiles. This is why so many attacks against Linux are at the file level.
Hacks
If hackers can capture a user ID and password by using a network analyzer, orcan crash an application and gain root access via a buffer overflow, one thingthey look for is what users are trusted by the local system. The 
/etc/hosts.
equiv and .rhosts files list this information.
.rhosts
The $home/.rhosts files in Linux specify which remote users can access
the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) r-commands (such as rsh, rcp, andrlogin) on the local system without a password. This file is in a specific user’shome directory, such as 
/home/jsmith . A .rhosts file may look like the this:
tribe   scott
tribe   eddie
This file allows users Scott and Eddie on the remote-system tribe to login tothe local host with the same privileges as the local user. If a plus sign (+) isentered in the remote-host and user fields, any user from any host could login to the local system. The hacker can add entries into this file by 
/H12012Manually manipulating it.
/H12012Running a script that exploits an insecure Common Gateway Interface(CGI) script on a Web-server application that’s running on the system.
This configuration file is a prime target for a hacker attack. On most Linuxsystems I’ve tested, these files aren’t enabled by default. However, a user cancreate one in his or her home directory on the system — intentionally oraccidentally — which can create a major security hole on your system.
hosts.equiv
The /etc/hosts.equiv specifies which accounts on the system can access
services on the local host. For example, if tribe were listed in this file, all
users on the tribe system would be allowed access! As with the .rhosts file,
external hackers can read this file and then spoof their IP address and host-name to gain unauthorized access to the local system. Hackers can also usethe names located in the 
.rhosts and hosts.equiv files to look for names of
other computers to attack.204 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 204
--- Page 228 ---
Countermeasures
Use both of the following countermeasures to prevent hacker attacks against
the .rhosts and hosts.equiv files in your Linux system.
Disabling commands
A good way to prevent abuse of these files is to disable the BSD r-commandsaltogether. This can be done by either
/H12012Commenting out the lines starting with 
shell, login, and exec in
inetd.conf .
/H12012Editing the rexec, rlogin, and rsh files located in the /etc/
xinetd.d directory. Open each file in a text editor, and change 
disable=no to disable=yes , as shown in Figure 12-10.
In Red Hat Linux, you can disable the BSD r-commands with the setup program:
1. Enter setup at a command prompt.
2. Select System Services from the menu.
3. Remove the asterisks next to each of the r-services.
Blocking access
A couple of countermeasures can block rogue access of the .rhosts and
hosts.equiv files:
/H12012Block spoofed addresses at the firewall, as I outline in Chapter 9.
/H12012Set the permissions on these files so that only the owners can read
them.
Figure 12-10:
The rexec
file showing
the disable
option.205 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 205
--- Page 229 ---
•.rhosts : Enter this command in each user’s home directory:
chmod 600 .rhosts
•hosts.equiv : Enter this command in the /etc directory:
chmod 600 hosts.equiv
You can also use Tripwire ( www.tripwire.org ) to monitor these files and be
alerted when access or changes are made.
NFS
The Network File System (NFS) is used to mount remote file systems (similar
to shares in Windows) from the local machine.
Hacks
If NFS was setup improperly or its configuration has been tampered with —namely, the 
/etc/exports file containing a setting that allows the world to
read the entire file system — remote hackers can easily obtain remote accessand do anything they want on the system. All it takes is a line such as the fol-lowing in the 
/etc/exports file:
/  rw
This line basically says anyone can remotely mount the root partition in aread-write fashion. Of course, the following conditions must also be true:
/H12012The NFS daemon (nfsd) must be loaded, along with the portmap daemonthat would map NFS to RPC.
/H12012The firewall must allow the nfs traffic through.
/H12012The remote systems that are allowed into the server running the NFSdaemon must be placed into the 
/etc/hosts.allow file.
This remote-mounting capability is easy to misconfigure. It’s often related toa Linux administrator’s not understanding what it takes to share out the NFSmounts and just resorting to the easiest way possible to get it working. Afterhackers can gain remote access, the system is theirs.206 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 206
--- Page 230 ---
Countermeasures
The best defense against NFS hacking depends on whether you actually need
the service running.
/H12012If you don’t need NFS, disable it altogether.
/H12012If you need NFS, implement both of the following countermeasures:
• Filter NFS traffic at the firewall — typically, TCP port 111 if you
want to filter all RPC traffic.
• Make sure that your /etc/exports and /etc/hosts.allow files
are configured properly to keep the world outside your network.
File Permission
In Linux, special file types allow programs to run with the file owner’s rights: 
/H12012SetUID (for user IDs)
/H12012SetGID (for group IDs)
SetUID and SetGIF are required when a user runs a program that needs fullaccess to the system to perform its tasks. For example, when a user invokesthe passwd program to his or her password, the program is actually loadedand run with root or any other user’s privileges. This is done so that the usercan run the program, and the program can update the password databasewithout root’s having to get involved in the process manually.
Hacks
By default, rogue programs that run with root privileges can be easily hidden.A hacker may do this to hide such hacking files as rootkits on the system.
Countermeasures
You can test for these rogue programs by using both manual and automatedtesting methods.207 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 207
--- Page 231 ---
Manual testing
The following commands can identify SetUID and SetGID programs:
/H12012Programs that are configured for SetUID:
find / -perm -4000 –print
/H12012Programs that are configured for SetGID:
find / -perm -2000 –print
/H12012Files that are readable by anyone in the world:
find / -perm -2 -type f –print
/H12012Hidden files:
find / -name “.*”
You probably have hundreds of files in each of these categories, so don’t be
alarmed. When you discover files with these attributes set, you’ll need tomake sure that they are actually supposed to have those attributes byresearching in your documentation, on the Internet, or even by comparingthem to a known secure system or data backup.
Keep an eye on your systems to detect any new SetUID or SetGID files that
suddenly appear.
Automatic testing
You can use an automated file-modification auditing program to alert youwhen these types of changes are made. This is what I recommend — it’s a loteasier on an ongoing basis.
/H12012A change-detection application, such as Tripwire, can help you keeptrack of what changed and when.
/H12012A file-monitoring program, such as COPS (
dan.drydog.com/cops ), finds
files that have changed in status (such as a new SetUID or removedSetGID).
Buffer Overflows
RPC and other vulnerable daemons are common methods for buffer-overflowattacks. Buffer-overflow attacks are often how the hacker can get in to modifysystem files, read database files, and more.208 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 208
--- Page 232 ---
Attacks
In a buffer-overflow attack, the hacker either manually sends strings of infor-
mation to the victim Linux machine or writes a script to do so. These stringscontain
/H12012Instructions to the processor to basically do nothing.
/H12012Malicious code to replace the attacked process.
For example, 
exec (“/bin/sh”) creates a shell command prompt.
/H12012A pointer to the start of the malicious code in the memory buffer.
If an attacked application (such as FTP or RPC) is running as root (many pro-
grams do), this can give the hacker root permissions in his remote shell.
You can run security-testing tools against your systems to test for buffer
overflows, but I don’t recommend it, because it can crash your system!
Countermeasures
Three main countermeasures can help prevent buffer-overflow attacks:
/H12012Disable unneeded services.
/H12012Protect your Linux systems with either a firewall or host-based intrusionprevention.
/H12012Enable another access control mechanism, such as TCP Wrappers, thatauthenticates users with a password.
Don’t just enable access controls via an IP address or hostname. That
can easily be spoofed.
Always make sure that your systems have been updated with the latestkernel and security patches.
Physical Security
Some Linux vulnerabilities involve the hacker’s actually being at the systemconsole.209 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 209
--- Page 233 ---
Hacks
When a hacker is at the system console, anything goes, including rebooting
the system (even if no one is logged in) simply by pressing Ctrl+Alt+Del. Afterthe system is rebooted, the hacker can start it up in single-user mode, whichallows the hacker to zero out the root password or possibly even read theentire 
/etc/passwd or /etc/shadow file.
Countermeasures
Edit your /etc/inittab file and remark out (place a #sign in front of) the
line that reads ca::ctrlaltdel:/sbin/shutdown -t3 -r now ,as shown
in the last line of Figure 12-11.
If you believe that a hacker has recently gained access to your system either
physically or by exploiting a vulnerability such as a weak password or bufferoverflow, you can use the lastprogram to view the last few logins into the
system to check for strange login IDs or login times. This program perusesthe 
/var/log/wtmp file and displays the users who logged in last. You can
enter last | head to view the first part of the file (the first ten lines) if you
want to see the most recent logins.
Figure 12-11:
/etc/ini
ttab
showing the
line that
allows a
Ctrl+Alt+Del
shutdown.210 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 210
--- Page 234 ---
General Security Tests
You can assess critical, and often-overlooked, security issues on your Linux
systems, such as the following:
/H12012Misconfigurations or unauthorized entries in the /etc/passwd and
/etc/shadow files
/H12012Password policies
/H12012Users equivalent to root
/H12012Suspicious automated tasks configured in cron
/H12012Signature checks on system binary files
/H12012Checks for rootkits
/H12012Network configuration, including measures to prevent packet spoofingand other DoS attacks
/H12012Permissions on system log files
You can do all these assessments manually — or, better yet, use an automatedtool to do it for you! Figure 12-12 shows the initiation of the Tiger securityauditing tool, and Figure 12-13 shows a portion of the audit results. Talk aboutsome great bang for no buck with this tool!
Figure 12-12:
Running
the Tiger
security
auditing
tool.211 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 211
--- Page 235 ---
I like to run the Red Hat–focused Linux Security Auditing Tool (LSAT) in addi-
tion to Tiger. It’s similar to Tiger, but it also searches for Red Hat Linux-specificsecurity issues.
You can use to test for the SANS Top 20 (
www.sans.org/top20 ) Vulnerabilities
is VLAD the Scanner by the Bindview Razor security team. A portion of its
output is shown in Figure 12-14.
Patching Linux
Ongoing patching is perhaps the best thing you can do to enhance the secu-rity of your Linux systems. Regardless of the Linux distribution you use,using a tool to assist in your patching efforts makes your job a lot easier.
Figure 12-14:
Partial
output of the
VLAD the
Scanner
tool.
Figure 12-13:
Partial
output of the
Tiger tool.212 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 212
--- Page 236 ---
Distribution updates
The distribution process is different on every distribution of Linux. You can
use the following tools, based on your specific distribution.
Red Hat
You can use the following tools to update Red Hat Linux systems:
/H12012Red Hat Package Manager (RPM), which is the GUI-based applicationthat runs in the Red Hat GUI desktop. It manages those files with a .rpmextension that Red Hat and other freeware and open-source developersuse to package their programs.
/H12012up2date, a command-line text-based tool that is included in Red Hat.
/H12012AutoRPM (
www.autorpm.org ).
/H12012The open-source NRH-up2date ( www.nrh-up2date.org ).
Debian
You can use the Debian Package System (dpkg) included with the operatingsystem to update Debian Linux systems.
Slackware
You can use the Slackware Package Tool (pkgtool) tool included with theoperating system to update Slackware Linux systems.
SuSE/Novell
SuSE (now owned by Novell) includes the YaST2 Package Manager.
Multiplatform update managers
Commercial tools add nice features over the standard package managers(which I describe in this chapter), such as correlating patches with vulnera-bilities and automatically deploying appropriate patches. Commercial toolsthat can help with Linux patch management include BigFix Patch Manager(
www.bigfix.com ) and SysUpdate ( www.securityprofiling.com ).213 Chapter 12: Linux18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 213
--- Page 237 ---
214 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 18 55784x Ch12.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 214
--- Page 238 ---
Chapter 13
Novell NetWare
In This Chapter
/H17075Selecting NetWare hacking tools
/H17075Port-scanning a NetWare server
/H17075Gleaning NetWare information without logging in
/H17075Exploiting common vulnerabilities when logged into NetWare
/H17075Minimizing NetWare security risks
As much as some of Novell’s competitors like to say that NetWare is a
thing of the past, it’s still alive and kicking quite strongly. There are mil-
lions of NetWare users around the world. The organizations running NetWareand other Novell products demand a solid directory-services infrastructureand stable environment.
NetWare administrators — some of the best around — often overlook or deny
that NetWare is hackable. This chapter shows you how to test for the most crit-ical NetWare exploits and outlines countermeasures to prevent the problems.
NetWare Vulnerabilities
Novell NetWare has a reputation as one of the most secure operating systemsavailable. This is one reason that you rarely hear of NetWare servers’ gettinghacked or having new vulnerabilities that crop up constantly. However, NetWarehas its security issues. Various NetWare vulnerabilities can be exploited —from NDS (now called eDirectory ) enumeration to remote password testing to
spoofing NetWare packets. Hackers can exploit many of NetWare’s vulnerabil-ities without even logging into the server!19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 215
--- Page 239 ---
NetWare servers are frequently the most vital servers within a network. They
often perform the following functions:
/H12012House critical files
/H12012Store replicas of the eDirectory database for hosting, replicating, andmanaging such directory-service objects as user IDs, printers, organiza-tional units, and application licenses
/H12012Host e-mail with Novell GroupWise
/H12012Host Web sites and Web applications with such programs as Apache andTomcat
/H12012Serve as firewalls with Novell BorderManager
Starting with NetWare 7, Novell will release a version of NetWare that’s Linux-based. So, if you do a lot of work with NetWare, now’s the time to start beef-ing up on your Linux skills!
Choosing Tools
The following are my favorite NetWare-specific tools — they can offer upeverything you need:
/H12012SuperScan (
www.foundstone.com ) for port scanning
/H12012LANGuard Network Security Scanner (www.gfi.com ) for port scanning,
OS enumeration, and vulnerability testing
/H12012NCPQuery (razor.bindview.com/tools/index.shtml ) for server
and eDirectory enumeration
/H12012Remote (packetstormsecurity.nl/Netware/penetration ) for
Remote Console password cracking
Make sure that you have the latest version of Novell’s Client32 software from
download.novell.com on your test computer before running these tests.
Getting Started
Although NetWare doesn’t have many serious security vulnerabilities (rela-tively speaking), a few stand out. The hacks in this chapter are against adefault installation of NetWare 5.1 from inside the firewall. However, these216 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 216
--- Page 240 ---
vulnerabilities and tests apply to most versions of NetWare 4. xand newer —
the ones running NDS and eDirectory. I also point out a few critical NetWare
3.xvulnerabilities.
Patches on your specific systems may have fixed some of these vulnerabili-ties. If you don’t get the exact same results as shown in this chapter, you’reprobably safe!
If you have the latest Novell-supplied patches on your systems, your systems
are likely to be secure. However, the hacks in this chapter are significant, soyou should test for them to make sure that your server is safe.
Older versions of NetWare such as 4.2 and 5.0 are being phased out of sup-
port. You’ll no longer receive security updates for these versions.
Server access methods
You can access a NetWare server in the following four ways — each of whichaffects how you can test:
/H12012Not-logged in: This is a connection where you simply perform port
scans or make NCP calls across the network without actually logging in.
/H12012Logged in: This connection requires you to log in with a valid bindery or
eDirectory user ID and password.
This is the basic method for accessing standard NetWare services.
/H12012Web access: This connection may be available if you’re running GroupWise
WebAccess e-mail services, various NetWare management tools, or other
basic Web-server applications.
/H12012Console access: This access method requires you to be either at the
server console or using a remote-connectivity product (such as NetWare’sbuilt-in rconsole or even a console that shipped with NetWare 3. xand
earlier systems).
When you finish scanning your NetWare systems for open ports andgeneral information gathering, you can test for common NetWare securityvulnerabilities.
Port scanning
Start testing your NetWare systems by performing an initial port scan tocheck what hackers can see. You can perform these scans in two main ways:217 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 217
--- Page 241 ---
/H12012If the server has a public IP address, scan from outside the firewall, if
possible.
/H12012If the server doesn’t have a public IP address, you can scan internally onthe network.
Hackers can be inside your network, too!
The SuperScan results in Figure 13-1 show several potentially vulnerable ports
open on this NetWare server, including FTP and the commonly exploited Echoand Character Generator ports. In addition, the NetWare specific port 524 isNCP (NetWare Core Protocol). NetWare uses this protocol for its internal com-munications with such hosts as clients and other servers — similar to SMB inWindows.
You may also find that GroupWise is running (TCP port 1677), as well as
potentially a Web server and other Web-based remote-access ports, such as80, 443, 2200, 8008, and 8009.
You can also perform a scan with LANguard Network Security Scanner. Using
a commercial tool such as this can often provide more details about the sys-tems you’re scanning than a basic port scanner. Figure 13-2 shows that it candetermine more information about the server, such as the NetWare versionand SNMP information. It also tells you what’s listening on the open portswithout your having to look them up.
Figure 13-1:
Using
SuperScan
to scan a
default
installation
of NetWare
5.1.218 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 218
--- Page 242 ---
NCPQuery
You can run NCPQuery with command line options to gather information
about your server and directory tree, including the server information shownin Figure 13-3.
This is a lot of information for a hacker to see without being logged in!
Figure 13-3:
Server and
eDirectory
information
gleaned
with
NCPQuery.
Figure 13-2:
Gathering
details with
LANguard
Network
Security
Scanner.219 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 219
--- Page 243 ---
Countermeasures
The following countermeasures can prevent the malicious enumeration of
your NetWare systems:
/H12012Installing the latest patches can eliminate many NetWare server vulnerabilities.
If your NetWare version has been or will be phased out by Novell —
meaning that it no longer provides security patches — you should seri-ously consider upgrading to the latest version.
/H12012Port scanning can be performed with two steps:
1. Unload any unneeded services, which in turn closes any associ-
ated ports.
2. Place the server behind a firewall to help block outsider attacks.
/H12012Blocking NCP port 524 at the firewall is the only way to disable anNCPQuery type of attack from outside.
This may not help much for insider attacks. Internal network communi-
cations require the NCP port 524 to be available.
/H12012Use strong passwords for all user IDs in case a hacker discovers an IDand attempts to log in.
Authentication
If a hacker can gather information such as the server, eDirectory, and user IDinformation, he may be able to exploit a known vulnerability or even try tolog in by using the user IDs that he discovered. When he’s in, all bets are off,and anything goes. He could
/H12012Log into your network as a regular user.
/H12012Log into your network as admin.
/H12012Obtain physical access to the server console.
It’s wise to assume that a hacker could log in as a user or administrator onyour NetWare system and test for the worst-case scenario.220 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 220
--- Page 244 ---
Rconsole
One of the most serious NetWare security vulnerabilities is the NetWare
Remote Console program (referred to as rconsole). Rconsole is an SPX protocol–based remote-control program similar to telnet and WindowsTerminal Services. It gives users full access to the NetWare console if theyknow the password. rconsole consists of the following:
/H12012The 
remote.nlm and rspx.nlm files on the server
/H12012The rconsole.exe client program in the sys:\public directory
/H12012For rconsole to work, you must load the rspx NLM with one of thesemethods:
• Enter 
load rspx at the console.
• Place it in your autoexec.ncf or ldremote.ncf file just below
your load remote line.
Attacks
Rconsole is vulnerable because its passwords can be easily obtained. Thepasswords are stored in either clear text or an easily crackable hash formaton the server in the 
sys:\system\autoexec.ncf file or sys:\system\
ldremote.ncf files.
If you encrypt your rconsole passwords, cracking them is simple. The follow-ing steps demonstrate how vulnerable the rconsole password really is:
1. Enter 
load remote to load the remote NetWare Loadable Module
(NLM) on the server.
2. Enter the password you want to use when prompted.
3. Enter remote encrypt and enter your rconsole password again when
prompted.The server generates the encrypted password and displays the entire
command you need to run on the screen, including the hashed pass-word. It looks similar to the response in Figure 13-4.
The server may also enter the command into the 
ldremote.ncf file, 
but it sometimes fails. For simplicity, just enter the load remote-E
password command manually into your autoexec.ncf file. Don’t write
this password down somewhere that’s easily accessible to others.221 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 221
--- Page 245 ---
Now it’s time to try cracking the encrypted rconsole password. For this, I use
the remote cracking program — not to be confused with the remote NLMthat’s part of rconsole.
Simply run the 
remote.exe cracking program against the rconsole password
hash that’s displayed on the screen (or stored in the server’s autoexe.ncf
or ldremote.ncf file). Enter a line like the following at a command prompt:
remote password_hash
The result is the rconsole password.You can try the preceding steps against mypassword. Figure 13-4 shows the
hash:
287502221D2EBB4BCDD44BDC68
Anyone using the following three items can even capture the encrypted rcon-
sole password traveling across the wire and decrypt it:
/H12012Network analyzer
/H12012Rcon program ( packetstormsecurity.nl/Netware/penetration/
rcon.zip )
/H12012The steps outlined in the rconfaq.txt file at packetstormsecurity.
nl/Netware/audit/rconfaq.zip
Figure 13-4:
Encrypting
your
rconsole
password.222 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 222
--- Page 246 ---
The remote NLM stores its password in server memory. Anyone with console
access can go into the NetWare debugger by pressing Shift+Alt+Shift+Esc(yes, you use both Shift keys) on the server keyboard and view it in cleartext. The process is explained at 
packetstormsecurity.nl/Netware/
audit/rconfaq.zip .
Countermeasures
The following can prevent attacks against NetWare servers running rconsole:
/H12012Don’t use rconsole — at least, don’t use it on critical NetWare servers.(Does anyone have a server that isn’t critical?)
/H12012If you must use rconsole, secure it with one of the following steps foryour version of NetWare:
• In NetWare 4. xor earlier, lock your server by using the monitor
NLM.
• With NetWare 5 and newer, load the scrsaver NLM. It displays the
fancy text-based NetWare snake and requires a valid NetWareaccount to unlock.
/H12012Consider using one of these remote NetWare management programsinstead of rconsole:
• Rconj is a Java-based version of rconsole that’s able to work over
using TCP. It comes with NetWare 5. xand later but has limited
functionality.
Be sure to patch Rconj if you run it on NetWare 6. Rconj has a knownauthentication vulnerability when running on NetWare 6 that allows ahacker to gain access without a password.
• AdRem Software (
www.adremsoft.com ) offers a couple of great
rconsole replacements that I highly recommend you check out.
• AdRem Free Remote Console runs on NetWare 4. xSP9 and later
servers.
As the name implies, it’s free!AdRem Free Remote Console doesn’t encrypt remote-console com-
munications, but it does require a valid NetWare login with a userID that has console operator privilege (such as admin or equiva-lent). This adds a level of security that plain old rconsole just can’toffer.
• AdRem sfConsole is a commercial product with a ton of features,
including encrypted communications and a Web-based interface.223 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 223
--- Page 247 ---
Server-console access
Physical access to the server console is a hacker’s pot of gold. After hackers
obtain this access, they can do practically anything they want to with theserver. This includes accessing the NetWare debugger to retrieve passwordsand potentially other confidential information stored in memory — not tomention crash the server and more.
The following countermeasures help ensure that NetWare console access is
minimized to only those who are authorized:
/H12012Physical security is a must. Chapter 6 explains how to secure serverrooms.
/H12012Lock the server screen. You can keep the server console secure by eitherselecting the Lock Server Console option in the monitor NLM or loadingthe scrsaver NLM.
Intruder detection
Intruder detection is one of the most critical security features built intoNetWare. It locks a user account for a specific period of time after a certainnumber of failed login attempts.
Make sure that intruder detection is enabled on your system. It’s disabled by
default.
Testing
Default settings for intruder detection — after it’s enabled — in NetWare 5.1
are shown in Figure 13-5. Chapter 7 details intruder detection.
Try logging in with invalid passwords for several test users — preferably,
users from different organizational units (OUs) within eDirectory — to seewhether intruder detection is working. Make sure that you type badpass-
words; blank ones don’t seem to work well for this test. Here’s how you knowwhether intruder detection is working:
/H12012If intruder detection is on, you should get a response similar to Figure 13-6.
/H12012If intruder detection is off, you get prompted over and over again for apassword.
This is how hackers test whether intrusion detection is enabled on yourNetWare server.224 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 224
--- Page 248 ---
Countermeasures
You can implement the following countermeasures to ensure that unautho-
rized logins are minimized and intruder detection is not abused:
/H12012Enable intruder detection as high in the directory tree as possible —preferably, at the uppermost organization level.
This is one of the best hacking countermeasures you can implement in a
NetWare environment.
/H12012Look for evidence that the console NLM was unloaded by searching forentries in the 
sys:\etc\console.log file.
/H12012Consider logging all events to a remote syslog server to help prevent ahacker from tampering with evidence.
Rogue NLMs
If a hacker gains console access to your server, a legitimate yet potentiallydangerous NLM can be loaded, which can do bad things to the system.
Figure 13-6:
A Novell
Client32
message.
Figure 13-5:
Intruder-
detection
settings in
NetWare
5.1.225 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 225
--- Page 249 ---
Testing
The following tests look for rogue NLMs running on your server.
Modules command
You can use the modules command at the server console prompt to view
loaded modules. As shown in Figure 13-7, you simply enter the commandmodules at the server-console screen, and it displays a listing of NLMs that
are loaded — from first to last in order of loading.
Look for these NLMs in the modules output. If neither you nor another admin-
istrator has loaded the following NLMs, you have a problem:
/H12012Password reset tools:
•setpwd
This third-party NLM can reset anyuser’s password on the server —
including admin! It’s located at 
ftp.cerias.purdue.edu/pub/
tools/novell/setpwd.zip .
•setspwdThis program resets the supervisor/admin password for NetWare
3.xand 4. x.
•setspass
This program resets the supervisor password for NetWare 3. x
systems.
Figure 13-7:
Viewing
loaded
applications
on a
NetWare
server.226 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 226
--- Page 250 ---
/H12012dsrepair: This built-in NLM can corrupt or destroy eDirectory. It’s actu-
ally intended to repair and maintain the eDirectory database.
/H12012netbasic: This built-in NLM can copy eDirectory files from the hidden
sys:\_netware directory. It accesses a DOS-like prompt on the server.
Check whether the nwconfig NLM is loaded. This built-in NLM is often used
for day-to-day server maintenance, such as installing patches and editingsystem files. However, a hacker can load it and back up or restore theeDirectory database so that its files can be copied for malicious purposes.You can look to see if the NLM is loaded by either
/H12012Looking at the modules output
/H12012Pressing Ctrl+Esc to view all loaded applications
/H12012Pressing Alt+Esc to toggle through all loaded applications
Many NLMs can load on a NetWare server — especially in the more recentversions. If you have a question about what an NLM does or want to seewhether it’s valid, you can search on the filename at 
www.google.com or at
support.novell.com to get more information.
A port scan of the server from another computer can find rogue applicationsas well.
Tcpcon
The tcpcon NLM shows ports that are listening and connected. Follow thesesteps to use it:
1. Enter 
load tcpcon at the server prompt.
2. Select Protocol Information from the main menu.
3. Select TCP and then TCP Connections to view the TCP ports that are
open.
4. Select UDP and then UDP Listeners to view the UDP ports that are
open.Figure 13-8 shows the TCP ports that are open and listening on this
server, including chargen, FTP, and NCP.
If something doesn’t look right, it may not be, so investigate the port numberfurther. My favorite port number reference is at 
www.iana.org/assignments/
port-numbers , but a simple Google search usually is productive.227 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 227
--- Page 251 ---
Admin utilities
If hackers can successfully log in to a NetWare server or eDirectory, they can
use, in malicious ways, some of the great — and free — NetWare admin utili-ties from JRB Software (
www.jrbsoftware.com ). For example, hackers can
/H12012Run the downsrvr program to reboot a NetWare server — most likely at
the worst possible time.
/H12012Use the serv_cmd program to disable logins, remotely load NLMs, and
add bindery contexts to the system.
Countermeasures
The following countermeasures can minimize the chances that maliciousNLMs will be running on your servers.
Documentation
The best way to keep track of loaded NLMs is to document, document, anddocument your server. It’s critical to know what’s supposed to be loaded onyour server at all times.
/H12012For each loaded NLM, you need to know its name, version, and date.
Keeping up-to-date records can get tedious, especially with a large
number of servers. Consider purchasing a commercial product —NetServerMon or AdRem Server Manager — to help you manage thistask.
Figure 13-8:
Using
tcpcon to
show open
TCP ports
on a
NetWare
server.228 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 228
--- Page 252 ---
/H12012Save and print recent versions of your startup.ncf and autoexec.ncf
files.
/H12012Document — at least, at a high level — your eDirectory structure. You
can either
• Take a screen capture of eDirectory as it looks in NetWare
Administrator or ConsoleOne.
• Run cx /t /a /r , and save the output of the program to a text file
by entering the following at a command prompt:
cx /t /a /r > filename.txt
Update your documentation after any system changes are made or any newpatches are applied.
Unauthorized logins
To prevent rogue NLMs or remote applications from being loaded or run froma workstation, apply these security measures to your NetWare systems:
/H12012Make strong passwords on every NetWare account. I outline minimum
password requirements in Chapter 7.
/H12012Secure the server console.
/H12012Enable intruder detection.
/H12012Neutralize dangerous NLMs, such as netbasic. You can either renamethem or remove them.
If you remove dangerous NLMs, make a backup of the files first. You may
need them in the future.
Clear-text packets
Most internal LAN traffic — regardless of the operating system in use — trav-els across the wire in clear text. The clear text can be captured and usedagainst you.
Packet capture
Clear-text packets can be captured with either
/H12012A network analyzer
/H12012Components of the Pandora NetWare hacking suite ( www.nmrc.org/
project/pandora )229 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 229
--- Page 253 ---
Pandora can spoof NCP packets, which can give them admin equiva-
lency on the network after the hacker logs in via a standard useraccount that he previously compromised. A hacker could log in as anormal user with a weak or blank password and then use Pandora tomanipulate NetWare traffic and get admin rights on the network.
Countermeasures
You can easily set up NCP packet signing within a NetWare environment. This
encrypts and provides proof that a packet actually originated from the send-ing host. NCP packet signing has four levels, but the level for the utmostsecurity is level 3, which requires packet signatures.
This can slow network traffic and place a larger processing burden on your
server. Level-3 packet signing can decrease network performance on busyNetWare servers — sometimes, by more than 50 percent.
The following steps explain how to enable level-3 packet signing:
/H12012Enable level-3 packet signing on the server and at the top of the
autoexec.ncf file with the following command:
set ncp packet signature option=3
/H12012Enable level-3 packet signing on NetWare clients with these steps:
1. Right-click your red Novell icon in your Windows system tray.
2. Select Novell Client Properties and Advanced Settings.3. Set the Signature Level to 3 (Required).
In NetWare 3. xand earlier, passwords are sent in clear text across the net-
work. For these versions, you can enter the following command on your
server and in the 
autoexec.ncf file to help prevent passwords from being
captured with a network analyzer:
set allow unencrypted passwords=off
General Best Practices for Minimizing
NetWare Security Risks
Although you can’t completely defend NetWare servers against attacks, you
can come close, which is more than you can say for other leading operatingsystems. These NetWare hacking countermeasures can help improve securityon your NetWare server above and beyond what I’ve already recommended.230 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 230
--- Page 254 ---
Rename admin
Rename the admin account. Figure 13-9 shows how this can be done in the
Novell ConsoleOne utility.
Be careful. Other applications, such as the server backup software, may
depend on this ID.
If you rename admin, be sure to edit any backup jobs or startup scripts that
depend on the admin account. It’s actually best to not use the admin accountfor these purposes anyway, so this may be a good time to make a change bycreating an admin equivalent for each application that’s dependent on anadmin ID. This can help make your system more secure by reducing thenumber of places that the admin account is exposed and vulnerable to crack-ing on the network.
Disable eDirectory browsing
A good way to ward off attacks is to disable Public’s right to browse thedirectory tree in either NetWare Administrator for NetWare 4. xor Novell
ConsoleOne for NetWare 5. xand later. This right is enabled by default to
enable users to browse the eDirectory tree easily.
Figure 13-9:
Renaming
the
NetWare
admin
account
with
ConsoleOne.231 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 231
--- Page 255 ---
Disabling the Public Browse right or any other eDirectory or file rights can
cause problems, such as locking users (including you) out of the network,disabling login scripts, and disabling printing. The potential risk depends onhow you configure eDirectory. If you remove Public’s Browse right, you canusually grant specific object rights lower in the tree where they’re neededto keep everything working. Make sure that you test these types of criticalchanges before applying them to your production environment.
NetWare Administrator
Follow these steps to disable the Public browse right to eDirectory withNetWare Administrator (
sys:\public\win32\nwadmn32.exe ):
1. Right-click the Root object in your directory tree.
2. Select Trustees of this Object.3. Select the [Public] trustee, as shown in Figure 13-10.4. Uncheck the Browse object right.
Novell ConsoleOne
Follow these steps to disable the Public browse right to eDirectory with
Novell ConsoleOne ( sys:\public\mgmt\ConsoleOne\1.2\bin\
ConsoleOne.exe ):
1. Right-click your tree object.
2. Select Trustees of this Object.
Figure 13-10:
The default
Browse
right for
[Public],
shown in
NetWare
Admin-
istrator.232 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 232
--- Page 256 ---
3. Select the [Public] trustee and then click Assigned Rights.
4. Uncheck the Browse right, as shown in Figure 13-11.
Removing bindery contexts
Remove any bindery contexts loaded on your server. Bindery contexts are in
place in NetWare 4. xand later to provide backward compatibility with older
clients that need to access the servers as though they’re NetWare 3. xor earlier
servers. This is typically due to either older applications or NetWare clients(such as netx and VLMs) that make bindery calls instead of eDirectory calls.
Removing bindery contexts can help prevent hacker attacks against bindery
weaknesses. To disable the bindery context on your server, simply remarkout the set Bindery Context line in your server’s 
autoexec.ncf file.
If you remove your bindery contexts, make sure that no clients or applicationsdepend on NetWare bindery emulation.
System auditing
Turn on system auditing by running the auditcon program at a commandprompt. This can help you track down a future intruder by auditing files, vol-umes, and even the directory tree. It’s just good security practice as well. You
Figure 13-11:
The default
Browse
right for
[Public],
shown in
ConsoleOne.233 Chapter 13: Novell NetWare19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 233
--- Page 257 ---
can get specific instructions on using auditcon for system auditing purposes
in the Novell Technical Information Document How to setup Auditing on your
Network at support.novell.com/cgi-bin/search/searchtid.cgi?/
10068513.htm .
TCP/IP parameters
In NetWare 5. xand above, based on your specific version, you can prevent
several types of DoS attacks as shown below by entering the following TCP/IPparameters at the server console:
set discard oversized ping packets=on
set discard oversized UDP packets=onset filter subnet broadcast packets=onset filter packets with IP header options=onset ipx netbios replication option=0set tcp defend land attacks=on
set tcp defend syn attacks=on
You can enter the preceding commands into the server’s autoexec.ncf file
so that they load each time the server starts.
Patching
Patch, patch, and patch again! Novell lists the latest patches for the NetWare
versions it supports on its Web site:
support.novell.com/produpdate/patchlist.html#nw234 Part IV: Operating System Hacking 19 55784x Ch13.qxd  3/29/04  4:19 PM  Page 234
--- Page 258 ---
Part V
Application
Hacking20 55784X PP05.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 235
--- Page 259 ---
In this part . . .
Well, this book has covered everything from non-
technical hacks to network hacks to operating
system hacks. One major category is left to cover: theapplications that run on top of all of this.
This part ﬁrst covers malware (you know, those darn
viruses, worms, and so on) and malware prevention tools,along with some various countermeasures. Although mal-ware is not particularly an application ethical hackers use(at least try not to use), it still affects everything else doneon networks from a security perspective, including mes-saging systems and Web applications, which are also inthis part. This part then takes a look at various messaginghacks and countermeasures affecting e-mail and instantmessaging systems. Finally, this part takes a look atcommon Web application hacks, along with some counter-measures to secure them from the elements.20 55784X PP05.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 236
--- Page 260 ---
Chapter 14
Malware
In This Chapter
/H17075Distributing malware
/H17075Testing your systems
/H17075Preventing malware
Malicious software (malware) has long been one of the biggest problems
computer users face. Viruses and worms have proved to be the biggest
nuisances, but these types of malware are ineffective if adequate controls are in
place. On the other hand, such types of malware as Trojan horses and rootkitscan inflict serious harm against computers and information, and are muchharder to defend against.
The implications of testing your own systems with malware attacks — as
hackers would do — are similar to some of the social-engineering and physi-cal-security attacks I cover elsewhere in the book. Introducing known mal-ware into your production systems is just not a good idea, considering thatyour business is at stake. In this chapter, although I cover some benign testsyou can run against your systems, I focus on how malware gets onto yoursystems, how to find and remove it after an infection is found, and whatproven countermeasures you can take to increase the odds that malwarestays out of your systems.
Implications of Malware Attacks
Malware is one of the greatest threats to the security of your information. Notonly do you have to deal with the well-known malware — the ILoveYous andCode Reds of the world — infecting your computers, but also, hackers areconstantly developing new ways to wreak havoc on systems. It seems thatevery month, widespread malware attacks take place around the globe. Themore recent attacks are mostly self-propagating — which means that they need
no user intervention to spread across computer networks and the Internet.These programs attack unpatched software and gullible users opening mali-cious e-mail attachments21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 237
--- Page 261 ---
238 Part V: Application Hacking 
A case study in malware with Ed Skoudis
In this case study, Ed Skoudis, an information-
security consultant for International NetworkServices, shared an experience he had relatedto malware. Here’s his account of what happened.
The situationMr. Skoudis and his penetration-testing team
were hired by a large financial institution todetermine whether they could break into thebank’s updated Internet gateway infrastructure.This penetration test focused on the new ele-ments of their infrastructure, including severalVPN gateways, firewalls, routers, and a handfulof servers. The goal of the test was to search forvulnerabilities and see how deep into the targetproduction network the team could penetrate.
The Web server was where things started to get
interesting for Mr. Skoudis and his team. Duringthe test in mid-2003, while scanning all of thetarget systems for vulnerabilities with the freeNessus tool, the team discovered that the Webserver was vulnerable to the WebDAV buffer-overflow exploit. This flaw was originallyannounced by Microsoft in March 2003, but noone had patched the server for 60 days.
The outcomeMr. Skoudis and his team were able to execute
commands on the machine by tickling WebDAV
and installed the Netcat tool to create a back-door. Then they scheduled the Netcat backdoorto restart every 10 minutes, to make sure theycould re-enter the system continually if theywere ever knocked off. Mr. Skoudis emphasizedthat penetration testers need to be extremelycareful in choosing the type of malware they uti-lize in their testing regimen. As a side note, hestated that he installs only application-levelbackdoors that are well understood, like Netcat.In addition, he stressed that penetration testersshould not install rootkits or introduce self-replicating code, such as viruses and worms,because they can make a production machineextremely unstable.
With the Netcat backdoor firmly lodged on the
target system, the team set up shop on thevictim Windows Web server. They installed theirscanning tools on this machine, including theNmap port scanner. Using the conquered Webserver as a jump-off point to scan further intothe network, the team found another vulnerablesystem. This time, they discovered a poorly con-figured Solaris machine on the internal networkthat allowed SSH access with an easilyguessed password. After he and his team com-promised the Solaris server, they installedanother Netcat backdoor on that system.
With two relatively common flaws — an
unpatched Windows Web server and an easilyguessed password —  Mr. Skoudis and his teammanaged to gain deep access into the targetnetwork. He emphasized the possibility of thistype of attack by a not-so-ethical hacker, alongwith the widespread availability of the malwareneeded to carry it out, and underscored theimportance of having a solid security program.This includes keeping systems patched andeducating users and administrators in selectingdifficult-to-guess passwords.
Ed Skoudis uses his exceptional technical
expertise to perform security assessments,design secure network architectures, andrespond to computer attacks for his customers.He is a well-known speaker on issues associ-ated with hacker tools and defenses, and hasauthored the excellent Prentice Hall booksMalware: Fighting Malicious Code and Counter
Hack: A Step-by-Step Guide to ComputerAttacks and Effective Defenses.21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 238
--- Page 262 ---
Most malware attacks — especially the recent ones — exploit well-known 
vulnerabilities that should’ve been fixed months before the attacks occur.Unfortunately, the general practice within IT and security is to install patcheswhen people get around to it. This is mostly because people either don’t makeit a priority to patch or simply can’t keep up with all the patches requiredacross all their systems. The hackers know this and take full advantage of it.
The widespread malware attacks that you hear about on the news aren’t the
ones to worry about. Trojan horses, rootkits, spyware, and other deviousprograms are the scary ones. These applications can do the following:
/H12012List running processes and applications
/H12012Load and kill running processes and applications
/H12012Capture keystrokes
/H12012Search and copy files
/H12012Steal passwords
/H12012Edit system files
/H12012Turn on Web cams and microphones
/H12012Remotely reboot computers
/H12012Perform practically any administrative function
Bad things can happen if any of these events occurs on your network, includ-ing confidential information being stolen, computers being taken offline, anddata being deleted.
Types of Malware
Most malware is platform-specific: It targets specific operating systems, appli-
cations, and vulnerabilities to spread more quickly.
Trojan horses
Trojan horses — named after the infamous Greek wooden horse used to pen-etrate the city of Troy — are executable files, often transmitted via e-mail,that masquerade as legitimate programs but actually perform malicious acts.239 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 239
--- Page 263 ---
Trojan-horse code works in the background — doing things like deleting infor-
mation, gathering passwords, and capturing keystrokes — while a legitimate-looking program, such as a screen saver or game, runs in the foreground.
Many Trojans — called remote-access Trojans, or RATs — set up backdoors on
the systems they infect, allowing hackers to access them remotely and con-
trol them from across the Internet. Many Trojans aren’t detected by antivirusprograms. With all things being equal (and antivirus software running), this isthe malware you should be afraid of. Some common RATs are NetBus,SubSeven, and Back Orifice.
Viruses
Computer viruses are the best-known malware category. Viruses are pro-grams that are often self-replicating — meaning that they can make copies of
themselves — and attach to executable files, deleting information and crash-ing computers whenever a user or other process runs the program. Even PDAviruses exist, some of which drain batteries and call 911 for you — howthoughtful!
Worms
Worms are self-propagating programs that travel around the Internet at light-
ning speed. They load up in memory, effectively exploit known software vul-nerabilities, and often end up crashing the systems.
Rootkits
Rootkits are nasty applications that hackers can use to control a computer
completely, with the ultimate prize of crashing the system or stealing informa-
tion. Rootkits are mostly found on UNIX systems but are becoming popularon the Windows platform. Rootkits are sets of programs that either
/H12012Masquerade as typical administrator command-line programs
/H12012Integrate into the kernel, or core, of the operating system
Kernel-based rootkits, such as Knark for Linux and the FU rootkit for Windows,tie into the actual operating system. With these programs, hackers can240 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 240
--- Page 264 ---
/H12012Hide system processes and applications from the Windows Task Manager
or the process list in UNIX
/H12012Change the group membership of processes and applications so that amalicious program can run as the system, administrator, or root account
/H12012Modify environment variables
/H12012Make programs look like they were run by another user, concealing thehacker’s identity in audit logs
Spyware
Spyware programs spy on you and sometimes even capture and transmit confidential information from your computer. They’re installed as cookies,Windows Registry entries, and even executables on the local computer.
“Legitimate” spyware that may be installed by an administrator or other
person to watch someone’s computer usage includes SpectorSoft’s eBlasterand Spector Pro, and TrueActive (formerly known as WinWhatWhere).
These programs are extremely powerful and capture video screen shots, turn
on the local microphone, track Web browsing, and even forward copies ofe-mails sent and received to a third-party address. Powerful andscary!
Adware is similar to spyware but a little less intrusive. It tracks Internet usageand pulls targeted ads to specific users, based on their habits.
Built-in programming interfaces
Programming interfaces built into operating systems can be used maliciously:
/H12012Java applets are programs written in the Sun Microsystems programming
language. Although these programs run in a sandbox — or safe area — to
ensure that the local system is not compromised by malicious code, theycan still cause security problems.
/H12012Microsoft .NET applications are programs written based on the new
application framework from Microsoft. Like Java applets, these pro-grams have their own playpen that helps ensure that malicious code isnot executed.
/H12012ActiveX controls are Microsoft-based programs that everyone loves to
hate. ActiveX controls can be executed with minimal effort in such appli-cations as Internet Explorer, Outlook, and other Microsoft programs.241 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 241
--- Page 265 ---
Their control over a computer can potentially cause serious harm to a
computer system and its stored information.
/H12012VBScripts are scaled-down versions of Microsoft’s Visual Basic program-
ming language. Similar to ActiveX controls, these scripts can wreakhavoc on local data.
Many of the common malware programs traversing the Internet today
are VBScripts.
/H12012Windows Script Host (WSH) is a script processor built into Windows —
similar to DOS batch files — that can be used to perform malicious acts.
/H12012JavaScript programs, which are similar to ActiveX and VBScripts, are
written in Netscape’s scripting language. They can cause computersharm if users willingly run them within Web browsers and e-mails.
Not all applications written in these programming interfaces are malicious.Many legitimate programs are used every day that run just fine and don’t doany harm.
Logic bombs
A logic bomb is a program — often, an automated script using regular network
administration tools — that is scheduled to run when it’s triggered by a certainevent, such as someone’s logging in, or run on a specific date or time, such astwo weeks after an employee is let go.
Logic bombs are a common way for disgruntled employees to seek revenge
on their former employers. Some logic bombs have destroyed entire data-bases of information, including the famous logic bomb planted by Tim Lloydat Omega Engineering a few years back. This program erased all the informa-tion from the company’s NetWare server, putting a stop to its manufacturingprocesses. This event resulted in $10 million in damages to the company, andultimately, 80 employees got laid off.
Security tools
Your own security tools can be used against you. This includes the followingtools:
/H12012Vulnerability scanners, such as Nessus and even the tried-and-trueNetcat tool, can place backdoors in your systems.
/H12012Network analyzers, including the ARP poisoning tools ettercap anddsniff.242 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 242
--- Page 266 ---
/H12012The DOS debug program that still ships with Windows.
/H12012The NetWare debugger backdoor.
You access the backdoor by pressing Shift+Alt+Shift+Esc all at the same
time (using both Shift keys) at the server console.
How Malware Propagates
Some time back — practically forever, in computer time — most malwarepropagated via floppy disks. In 1981, the first computer virus was released:the Apple II Elk Cloner virus. In 1986, the first virus that affected theMicrosoft/Intel platform — the Brain virus — was released. Both of theseviruses were floppy-disk–based, but neither packed the punch that manyviruses have come to inflict on their victims since that time.
Some of the first malware exploited vulnerabilities in computer hardware and
software architectures — like what happens today. These old-fashioned virusesspread very slowly by today’s standards. It could take months and sometimesyears for a few thousand systems to be infected. What’s different about today’smalware? It’s the method of propagation. The Internet allows malware tospread around the world quickly. Malware can affect hundreds of thousandsof systems within a few weeks, as happened with the Code Red and Nimdaworms, or within a few minutes, as we saw with the Slammer/Sapphire worm.Hackers from anywhere in the world can try penetrating your systems — attheir convenience.
Automation
Automated attacks are the wave of the future for malware. The Internet is notgoing away. In fact, more systems are going online — more users, more hack-ers, and a greater number of applications are emerging that can be affected.This includes Web services; peer-to-peer (P2P) software, such as instant mes-saging (IM); and other file-sharing technologies, such as Gnutella, Kazaa,Morpheus, and mobile-device applications that run on PDAs and cell phones.
E-mail
The most common malware attack channel is through e-mail. A hacker simplyattaches a virus or Trojan horse to an e-mail — often, through an automatedmechanism — and sends the message to unsuspecting users. This process is243 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 243
--- Page 267 ---
automated with self-propagating worms making an attack even easier. The
text of the e-mail says, “See the attached note” or “Check out this game.”Many gullible users open the attachment, thinking it’s something that willbrighten up their day. Instead, it’s malware looking to copy or delete localfiles and often glean e-mail addresses from the user’s address book to senditself on to other users. If antivirus software is missing, outdated, or disabledat the time, this can spell bad news for the computer or network.
Hacker backdoors
Malware is propagated on computer systems by hackers compromising ahost from across the network or Internet, obtaining administrator or rootaccess by exploiting a known vulnerability and then installing the malware totheir heart’s content. They can set up backdoors, giving them remote accessso they can come back and play in the future.
Many of these infections go unnoticed indefinitely, usually until the network
administrator suspects that something strange is going on, or the systemcrashes, or information gets stolen or erased.
Testing
You can carry out various tests to check for malware infections on your net-work, as described in the following sections.
Vulnerable malware ports
You should look for Trojan ports when assessing your systems. Here aresome common ones to look out:
/H1201231337, 54320, and 54321 (Back Orifice and Back Orifice 2000)
/H1201212345 and 12346 (NetBus)
/H120121243 and 27374 (SubSeven)
When testing, look for computers listening on these ports. These port num-bers can usually be changed in most malware applications, so don’t rely onthese completely.244 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 244
--- Page 268 ---
Two great Web sites I refer to a lot when I want to see how a particular piece
of malware works are the following:
/H12012www.simovits.com/trojans/trojans.html is a comprehensive listing
of Trojan horses.
/H12012PestPatrol’s catalog of pests at research.pestpatrol.com/PestInfo/
pestdatabase.asp .
Manual assessment
It helps to know your systems — what software is installed and what servicesare running. Document your baseline environment, if you haven’t already, byusing the same methods I describe in this chapter.
If you suspect that one of your systems may be infected by malware, or you
want to see which applications are loaded on your system, there are toolsand techniques you can use. The key here is to search for things that justdon’t look right.
Windows
Because most malware affects Windows, there are various tests specific tothat platform you can carry out to test for malware infections.
Odd file names
If you’re unsure what a specific file does or want more details on file-formatand header information, you have a couple of options for information:
/H12012Check Wotsit’s Format at 
www.wotsit.org for information on file for-
mats and headers.
/H12012Search for the filename in Google with both Web and Groups searches.
Netstat
Run netstat -an at a command prompt.
/H12012The aoption displays all connections and listening ports.
/H12012The noption displays IP addresses and port numbers in numeric form to
make them easier to read.
You see something similar to the following list:245 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 245
--- Page 269 ---
Active Connections
Proto  Local Address          Foreign Address        StateTCP    0.0.0.0:80             0.0.0.0:0              LISTENINGTCP    0.0.0.0:135            0.0.0.0:0              LISTENINGTCP    0.0.0.0:445            0.0.0.0:0              LISTENINGTCP    10.11.12.202:139       0.0.0.0:0              LISTENINGTCP    10.11.12.202:1044      208.215.179.139:80     CLOSE_WAITTCP    10.11.12.202:2099      10.11.12.204:139       ESTABLISHEDTCP    10.11.12.202:2100      10.11.12.2:139         TIME_WAITUDP    0.0.0.0:445            *:*                UDP    10.11.12.202:137       *:*                
UDP    10.11.12.202:138       *:*                
The preceding example shows several Microsoft NetBIOS networking ports
(135, 137, 138, 139, and 445) and an HTTP connection in progress (port 80).The NetBIOS connections may be questionable, but I’ve actually initiatedthose connections, so I trust that they’re legitimate.
Look for connections to the following ports to scope out possible malware or
other hacker behavior in progress:
/H12012NetBIOS ports
/H12012Common malware ports
/H12012Ports that can indicate malicious behavior, including telnet (TCP port 23)and FTP sessions that shouldn’t be occurring (TCP ports 20 and 21)
Port mapping
A port-mapper program shows which applications are actually connected tothe specific open ports.
My favorite port mapper is a free tool called Vision by Foundstone (
www.
foundstone.com ). I recommend this tool for your toolbox.
Figure 14-1 shows the detailed information that Vision can provide. Ports
12345 and 12346 are mapped to c:\temp\Patch.exe . That’s the NetBus
server executable — yikes!
Task Manager
Press Ctrl+Alt+Del to load the Windows Task Manager and see whether anystrange applications or processes are loaded.
Many strange-looking processes are legitimate. Make sure that you know what
you’re dealing with, so you don’t stop a legitimate program. A quick Googlesearch on the filename usually provides enough information. Just because it’snot there doesn’t mean it’s not loaded, though, because some processes, suchas the FU rootkit for Windows, have the ability to hide themselves.246 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 246
--- Page 270 ---
Net use
You can run net use at a command prompt to see what drives are mapped
to external systems. Look for drive mappings that should not be there.
Registry
Look in your Windows Registry under the following HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE
(HKLM) keys for strange-looking applications that are loading. This is a
common place for malware to be initiated upon startup.
HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run
HKLM\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\RunOnce
HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\RunOnceEx
Startup files
Check your Windows startup folder and files such as autoexec.bat and
config.sys in the root directory of the C: drive for any applications that
don’t belong. Unknown programs can signal that a rogue application is con-
figured to start every time the computer boots.
Linux
For your Linux-based systems, you can run various tests to find out moreabout what’s running on your systems.
netstat
Run netstat -at to view active network connections.
Figure 14-2 shows that a Web server and SSH server are running with twocomputers connected to these services. In addition, you see that the X11 ser-vice for X Window along with the domain service (DNS), sunrpc, and SMTPservice for e-mail. Check these types of things before a suspected attackoccurs so that you know what belongs and what doesn’t.
Figure 14-1:
Running
Vision to
map ports
to actual
applications
running on a
system.247 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 247
--- Page 271 ---
lsof
The lsof utility lists open files, as shown in Figure 14-3, so you can check for
strange connections. This is similar to the Vision program for Windows.
ps
The ps utility displays running processes, as shown in Figure 14-4. You cancheck for strange applications that don’t look right. 
This is why it helps to know what’s supposed to be loaded!
Startup files
Check your Linux startup files (such as inetd.conf and xinetd.conf ) for
any applications that don’t belong. Unknown programs can signal that a
rogue application is configured to start every time the computer boots.
Figure 14-3:
Using the
lsof utility to
look for
potential
malware
applications
that are
loaded.
Figure 14-2:
Running
netstat in
Linux shows
the network
connections.248 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 248
--- Page 272 ---
Network card
Determine whether someone or some malware has placed the machine’s net-
work card into promiscuous mode, indicating the use of a network analyzer.Enter this line at the command prompt:
ifconfig –a | grep PROMISC
If the return value is not empty, an interface is running in promiscuous mode.
You can enter this command into a cron job that runs every few hours that
can alert you if one is found.
Antivirus software testing
For starters, check whether your antivirus software is actually working.
Before you begin testing your antivirus software, make sure that you have the
latest virus software engine and signatures loaded.
You have a couple of safe options for checking the effectiveness of your
antivirus software, as described in the following two sections. This is by nomeans a comprehensive method of testing your malware-protection mecha-nisms, but it serves as a good, safe start.
Eicar test string
Eicar is a European-based malware think tank that has worked in conjunctionwith malware vendors to provide this basic system test. The eicar test string
Figure 14-4:
Running the
ps utility to
display
running
processes.249 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 249
--- Page 273 ---
is transmitted in the body of an e-mail or as a file attachment so that you can
see how your server and workstations respond. You basically access this file —which contains the following 68-character string — on your computer to seewhether your antivirus or other malware software detects it:
X5O!P%@AP[4\PZX54(P^)7CC)7}$EICAR STANDARD-ANTIVIRUS-TEST-FILE!$H+H*
You can download a text file with this string from www.eicar.org/anti_
virus_test_file.htm . Several versions of the file are available on this site.
One version is a zip file. I recommend testing with this file to make sure thatyour antivirus software can detect malware within compressed files.
When you run this test, you may see results similar to Figure 14-5 from your
antivirus software.
GFI’s Email Security Testing Zone
A freebie at www.gfi.com/emailsecuritytest is a good e-mail malware test
to run against your server and clients. This series of tests sends e-mails withmalicious-like scripts in such programming languages as Visual Basic andActiveX to check exactly what gets through your e-mail system. These aren’tmalicious tests — just tests that should invoke your antivirus software or
other protective measures on your e-mail server or gateway if your softwareis configured and working correctly.
Network scanning
Use Nmap, SuperScan, or your favorite port-scanning tool to check for abnor-mal ports open on your network hosts.
Figure 14-5:
Using the
eicar test
string to test
antivirus
software.250 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 250
--- Page 274 ---
Some connections that show as open aren’t necessarily accurate and depend-
able. You may need to investigate unknown ports on the systems further byusing a port-mapping tool such as Vision for Windows or lsof for Linux, asdescribed previously in this chapter.
Using SuperScan, you may find the following results in a quick network scan:
* - 10.10.1.1  fs1
|___ 12345 Win95/NT Netbus backdoor
* - 10.10.1.2  [Unknown]
* - 10.10.1.4  laser* + 10.10.1.204  PC100
|___ 12345 Win95/NT Netbus backdoor
* + 10.10.1.209  DQ
|___ 12345 Win95/NT Netbus backdoor
You can also use Nmap to find specific malware ports, as shown in Figure 14-6.
During a recent incident response project that I was on, I found dozens of
computers listening on TCP port 12345 — the default port of the NetBusTrojan! Needless to say, I was quite concerned. After some poking around,I discovered that NetBus had not infested the network, as it originallyappeared. It was the OfficeScan NT antivirus product by Trend Micro thatwas listening on that port — who would’ve thought? Major lesson learned.
I recommend scanning your entire network for spyware with PestPatrol
Auditor’s Edition (
www.pestpatrol.com ) or a similar program. Figure 14-7
shows the results of a stand-alone PestPatrol scan on the local computer; itfound NetBus and several spyware cookies. PestPatrol detects spyware,adware, Trojans, and some rootkits.
Figure 14-6:
Nmap
results
showing the
NetBus
server
listening on
ports 12345
and 12346.251 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 251
--- Page 275 ---
Every time I run a full scan on my system, tools are called suspect, and my
software — antivirus software especially — tends to “clean up” those tools
for me. I must either replace my security tools from backup or download andinstall them again. If any of your security tools or security testing softwaremay look like malware on your computer, either
/H12012Keep backup copies of the original installation files.
/H12012Have your malware-protection software skip the files or directorieswhere your security tools are installed.
Of course, if an infection is suspected — and periodically, such as once amonth, even when infections aren’t suspected — run your antivirus softwareagainst all the computers on your network. Another tool to double-check yoursystems is McAfee’s AVERT Stinger (
vil.nai.com/vil/stinger ). This stand-
alone antivirus executable checks for several dozen of the latest common mal-ware items and known variants of each.
Behavioral-analysis tools
For a neat set of tests to find whether your Windows-based systems are sus-ceptible to behavioral-based malware attacks — that is, attacks that don’tmatch a specific signature, but perform a function such as writing to the localhard drive — check out the demos at the Finjan Software Test Center at 
www.
finjan.com/mcrc/sec_test.cfm . These tests — which include “malicious”
Figure 14-7:
Sample
results from
a PestPatrol
scan.252 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 252
--- Page 276 ---
executables, JavaScript, ActiveX, and Visual Basic — safely show you just
what can happen without the proper malware protection in place on yoursystems.
In my testing, few antivirus and personal firewall applications actually detected
any wrongdoings when running these tests. The scripting tests require you togrant permission to load the scripts — many users just do this automatically!
Malware Countermeasures
You can implement various countermeasures to prevent malware attacksagainst your systems, as described in the following sections.
General system administration
Security countermeasures within your organization can help prevent attacks:
/H12012Your first and foremost goal should be to keep hackers and malware outof your systems in the first place. If you perform the other countermea-sures and system-hardening best practices mentioned throughout thisbook and referenced in Appendix A, you’re on your way.
/H12012Create an incident-response plan. The FedCIRC Incident HandlingChecklists at 
www.fedcirc.gov/incidentResponse/IHchecklists.
html is a good place to start.
No matter what measures you have in place to protect your systemsfrom malware infections, you’ll probably be attacked sometime. Planahead so you don’t have to make critical decisions under pressure.
/H12012Before deploying networkwide any programs downloaded from theInternet, test and analyze the programs for malicious behavior on iso-lated systems.
/H12012Use malware-protection software (such as antivirus, spyware protection,and Trojan testers).
Two guidelines can increase the effectiveness of your protection:
• Load the software on the layers of your network wherever possible,
including on firewalls, content-filtering servers, e-mail gateways/
firewalls, e-mail servers, and e-mail clients.253 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 253
--- Page 277 ---
• Use different malware-protection applications (from multiple ven-
dors) or a program that combines the scanning engines of several
antivirus vendors in one fell swoop, such as Antigen from SybariSoftware (
www.sybari.com/home ).
/H12012Apply the latest software patches — especially critical security updates.
/H12012Back up critical systems regularly. This could include performing the following:
• Image or other backup that can be restored quickly in the event of
a serious infection
• Copies and MD5 or SHA checksums of critical executables in case
you need to restore or compare existing ones for authenticity
• Emergency repair disks for critical systems in case of a malware
infection
/H12012Enable heuristics protection in your antivirus software, if possible, tohelp detect behavioral anomalies that need to be blocked or cleaned.
/H12012Never rely on digitally signed code — such as ActiveX controls thatInternet Explorer downloads and prompts you to load — to run properlyon your systems. Digital signatures on this code verify only that it camefrom a trustworthy source — not how it actually behaves when it’sloaded.
/H12012Don’t just disable such application interfaces as ActiveX, WindowsScript Host, JavaScript, and Java without a good reason.
All these programming interfaces have some legitimate uses. Applications
can stop working if these interfaces are disabled haphazardly. If the othersecurity controls I mention here are in place, your systems should bepretty secure from malware written in these languages. You want to find agood balance between security and usability for your users so that secu-rity doesn’t get in the way of people doing their jobs.
/H12012Make sure that a firewall is always in place on your network. Use it tolook for
• Suspicious ports in use (or trying to be used)
• Heavy traffic patterns that can signal a malware infection
/H12012Use IDS and IDP systems to stop potential malware infections in their
tracks when they try to enter your network.
/H12012Run a rootkit-detection application:
• Rkdet (
vancouver-Webpages.com/rkdet ) for Linux checks for
someone installing a rootkit or other malware on your systems.
• chkrootkit ( www.chkrootkit.org ) tests after the fact for over 50
different installed rootkits on many popular flavors of UNIX.254 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 254
--- Page 278 ---
E-mails
In addition to the preceding security countermeasures, you can implement
several e-mail–specific malware-protection measures:
/H12012Make it policy for users not to open unsolicited e-mails and any attach-ments — especially those from unknown senders.
/H12012Plan for users who ignore or forget about the policy of leaving unsolicitede-mails and attachments unopened.
These automatic technical measures can help prevent malware from
infecting user systems:
• At the server or e-mail gateway, filter e-mails that have executable
attachments, such as 
.com , .exe , .pif , .scr , and .vbs . The File
Extension Source at filext.com has information about more than
8,500 file types.
•Always run antivirus software wherever it can be installed — at the
handheld, desktop, and server levels, if possible.
• Run antivirus software at the server or gateway levels, if possible.
Make sure that encrypted files and emails can be protected against malware.
• Encryption won’t keep malware out of files or e-mails. You’ll just
have encrypted malware within the files or e-mails.
• Encryption keeps your server or gateway antivirus from detecting
the malware until it reaches the desktop.
Files
You must perform regular malware protective maintenance on your file sys-tems. The following countermeasures will help:
/H12012Periodically scan all possible systems on your network, and enable real-time malware protection that can’t easily be disabled by users.
Scan all files — not just executable ones — to help prevent unknown
malware issues.
/H12012Consider changing file associations for potentially malicious executa-bles, such as 
com, .exe , .pif , .scr , and .wsh .
For example, you can change the Windows Script Host file associationsto something like Notepad.exe in case they’re ever launched. That way,Notepad will load the file instead of the Windows Script Host engine.255 Chapter 14: Malware21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 255
--- Page 279 ---
256 Part V: Application Hacking 21 55784x Ch14.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 256
--- Page 280 ---
Chapter 15
Messaging Systems
In This Chapter
/H17075Attacking e-mail systems
/H17075Assailing instant messaging
/H17075Securing your servers and clients
Messaging systems — those e-mail and instant messaging (IM) applica-
tions that we depend on — are often hacked within a network. Why?
Well, from my experience, messaging software — both at the server andclient level — is vulnerable because network administrators forget aboutsecuring these systems, believe that antivirus software is all that’s neededto keep trouble away, and ignore the existing security vulnerabilities.
In this chapter, I show you how to test for common e-mail and instant-
messaging issues. I also outline key countermeasures to help prevent thesehacks against your systems.
Messaging-System Vulnerabilities
E-mail and instant-messaging applications are hacking targets on your net-work. In fact, e-mail systems are some of the most targeted. Given the prolif-eration and business value of instant messaging and other P2P applications,attacks against networks launched via instant-messaging channels will be atleast as common as e-mail attacks.
A ton of vulnerabilities are inherent in messaging systems. The following fac-
tors can create weaknesses:
/H12012Security is rarely integrated into software development.
/H12012Convenience and usability often outweigh the need for security.
/H12012Many of the messaging protocols were not designed with security inmind — especially those developed several decades ago, when securitywasn’t nearly the issue it is today.22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 257
--- Page 281 ---
Many hacker attacks against messaging systems are just minor nuisances;
others can inflict serious harm on your information and your organization’sreputation. The hacker attacks against messaging systems include these:
/H12012Transmitting malware (as I describe in Chapter 14)
/H12012Crashing servers
/H12012Obtaining remote control of workstations
/H12012Capturing and modifying confidential information as it travels across thenetwork
/H12012Perusing e-mails in e-mail databases on servers and workstations
/H12012Perusing instant-messaging log files on workstation hard drives
/H12012Gathering messaging trend information, via log files or a network ana-lyzer, that can tip off the hacker about conversations between peopleand organizations
/H12012Gathering internal network configuration information, such as host-names and IP addresses
Hacker attacks like these can lead to such problems as lost business, unauthorized — and potentially illegal — disclosure of confidential infor-mation, and loss of information.
E-Mail Attacks
The following e-mail attacks exploit the most common e-mail security vulner-abilities I’ve seen. The good news is that you can eliminate or minimize mostof them to the point where your information is not at risk. You may not wantto carry out all these attacks against your e-mail system — especially duringpeak traffic times — so be careful!
Some of these attacks require the basic hacking methodologies: gathering
public information, scanning and enumerating your systems, and attacking.Others can be carried out by sending e-mails or capturing network traffic.
E-mail bombs
E-mail bombs can crash a server and provide unauthorized administratoraccess. They attack by creating DoS conditions against your e-mail softwareand even your network and Internet connection by taking up so much band-width and requiring so much storage space.258 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 258
--- Page 282 ---
259 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems
A case study in e-mail hacking with Thomas Akin
In this case study, Thomas Akin, a well-known
expert in e-mail systems and forensics, sharedwith me an experience in e-mail hacking. Here’shis account of what happened.
The situationMr. Akin was involved in a case where a client’s
e-mail system was blacklisted for sending hun-dreds of thousands of spam e-mails. The clientspent two weeks reconfiguring its e-mail serverin an attempt to stop the spam e-mails fromgoing through the system. The client looked atevery technical possibility — including makingsure that the server was not an open SMTPrelay — but nothing worked. Over 100,000 spame-mails a day were being sent through the com-pany. After losing several customers becausethe company couldn’t send them any e-mails,the company called Mr. Akin to see whether hecould help.
Mr. Akin first checked to see whether the e-mail
system was acting as an open relay, but it wasnot. Because the e-mail system wasn’t miscon-figured, there shouldn’t have been any reasonfor blacklisting the client. Then he reviewed thespam e-mail headers, expecting to see a stan-dard spoofed e-mail. Instead, after reviewingthe headers, he saw that they were coming
from the company’s e-mail system. Not onlythat, but they were also originating from areserved IP address — an address that isn’teven allowed on the Internet.
Momentarily stumped, Mr. Akin looked at the
text of the e-mail messages themselves. “Onetime only!” “Buy me now!” “Best deal ever!”This is the standard spam nonsense, except thatthese e-mails were signed by Laura and John(names disguised to protect the guilty). Not onlythat, Laura and John listed their phone numbersso potential customers could contact themeasily — 555-1234. How nice of them!
The outcomeA quick search online turned up a phone-
number match to a Laura and John living in EastBumble, USA. Bingo! It turned out that Johnwas a former employee and that his dial-upaccount had not been disabled when he wasfired from the company. A quick glance at thelog files showed that the “john” account hadused the company’s dial-up access during theexact times the spam e-mails were sent out.The company immediately disabled theaccount, and the spam e-mails stopped.
Even though the spamming was stopped, the
company was desperate to know how thee-mails were being sent through its system. Thedial-up account should have allowed only lim-ited access through a menu system — not fullaccess to the organization’s network. Aftersome research, Mr. Akin determined that Johnhad bypassed the dial-up’s menu system andwas using a program called slirp to turn hisinternal dial-up connection into a full Internetconnection. Because John was dialing into thecompany’s modem bank, the e-mail system sawhim as an internal user, letting him send e-mailto anyone and anywhere he wanted. The com-pany quickly reviewed all dial-up accounts andfound that over two dozen accounts were stillactive and being used by former employees!
Thomas Akin is the founding director of the
Southeast Cybercrime Institute at KennesawState University. He is a CISSP , holds severalnetworking certifications, and is a member ofMensa.22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 259
--- Page 283 ---
Attachments
An attacker can create an attachment-overloading attack by sending hundreds
or thousands of e-mails with very large attachments.
Attacks
Attachment attacks may have a couple of different goals:
/H12012The whole e-mail server may be targeted for a complete interruption ofservice with these failures:
• Storage overload
Multiple large messages can quickly fill the total storage capacityof an e-mail server. If the messages aren’t automatically deleted bythe server or manually deleted by individual user accounts, theserver will be unable to receive new messages.
This can create a serious DoS problem for your e-mail system,
either crashing it or requiring you take your system offline to cleanup the junk that has accumulated. A 100MB file attachment sentten times to 80 users can take 80GB of storage space. Yikes!
• Bandwidth blocking
An attacker can crash your e-mail service or bring it to a crawl byfilling the incoming Internet connection with junk. Even if yoursystem automatically identifies and discards obvious attachmentattacks, the bogus messages eat resources and delay processing ofvalid messages.
/H12012An attack on a single e-mail address can have serious consequences ifthe address is for a really important user or group.
Countermeasures
These countermeasures can help prevent attachment-overloading attacks:
/H12012Limit the size of either e-mails or e-mail attachments. Check for thisoption in e-mail server configuration options (such as those provided inNovell GroupWise and Microsoft Exchange), e-mail content filtering, ande-mail clients.
This is the best protection against attachment overloading.
/H12012Limit each user’s space on the server. This denies large attachments
from being written to disk. Limit message sizes for inbound and evenoutbound messages if you want to prevent a user from launching thisattack inside your network. I’ve found 10MB to 20MB to be good limits.260 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 260
--- Page 284 ---
Consider using FTP or HTTP instead of e-mail for large file transfers. By
doing so, you can store one copy of the file on a server and have therecipient download it on his or her own. This can help keep messagestore sizes at a minimum.
Connections
A hacker can send a huge amount of e-mails simultaneously to addresses onyour network. These connection attacks can cause the server to give up on ser-vicing any inbound or outbound TCP requests. This can lead to a completeserver lockup or a crash, often resulting in a condition where the attacker isallowed administrator or root access to the system!
Attacks
This attack is often carried out in spam attacks, which are covered later inthis chapter.
Countermeasures
Many e-mail servers allow you to limit the number of resources used forinbound connections, as shown in the Number of SMTP Receive Threadsoption for Novell GroupWise in Figure 15-1. It can be next to impossible tocompletely stop an unlimited amount of inbound requests. However, you canminimize the impact of the attack. This setting limits the amount of serverprocessor time, which can help prevent a DoS attack.
Figure 15-1:
Limiting the
number of
resources to
handle
inbound
messages.261 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 261
--- Page 285 ---
Even in large companies, there’s no reason that thousands of thousands of
inbound e-mail deliveries should be necessary within a short time period.
Some e-mail servers, especially UNIX-based servers, can be programmed to
deliver e-mails to a daemon or service for automated functions. If DoS protec-tion isn’t built into the system, a hacker can crash both the server and theapplication that receives these messages.
Autoresponders
An interesting attack I’ve seen is to find two or more users on the same or dif-ferent e-mail systems that have autoresponder configured. Autoresponder isthat annoying automatic e-mail response you often get back from randomusers when you’re subscribing to a mailing list. A message goes to the mailing-list subscribers, and then users have their e-mail configured to automaticallyrespond back, saying they’re out of the office or, worse, on vacation. This is agreat way to tell thousands of people that your house and belongings are pos-sibly available for taking — but I digress.
Attacks
An autoresponder attack is a pretty easy hack. Many unsuspecting users ande-mail administrators never know what hit them! The hacker sends each of thetwo (or more) users an e-mail from the other simply by masquerading as thatperson (an easy hack I outline in this chapter). This attack can create a never-ending loop that bounces thousands of messages back and forth betweenusers. This can create a DoS condition by filling either the user’s individualdisk space quota on the e-mail server or the e-mail server’s entire disk space.
Countermeasures
The best countermeasure for an autoresponder attack is to make it policythat no one sets up an autoresponder message. Those messages are tooannoying to be of value anyway, right?
Prevent e-mail attacks as far out on your network perimeter as you can. The
more traffic or malicious behavior you keep off your e-mail servers and clients,the better.
Automatic e-mail security
You can implement the following countermeasures as an additional layer ofsecurity for your e-mail systems.
Tarpitting
Tarpitting detects inbound messages destined for unknown users. If your
e-mail server supports tarpitting, it can help prevent spam or DoS attacksagainst your server. If a predefined threshold is exceeded — say, more than262 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 262
--- Page 286 ---
ten messages — the tarpitting function effectively blocks traffic from the send-
ing IP address for a period of time.
E-mail firewalls
E-mail firewalls and content-filtering applications (such as CipherTrust’sIronMail and NetIQ’s MailMarshal, respectively) can prevent various e-mailattacks. These tools protect practically every aspect of an e-mail system.
Perimeter protection
Although not e-mail–specific, many firewall, IDS, and IDP systems can detectvarious e-mail attacks and shut off the attacker in real time. This can come inhandy during an attack at an inconvenient time.
Banners
One of the first orders of business for a hacker when hacking an e-mail serveris performing a basic banner grab to see whether he can tell what e-mail serversoftware is running. This is one of the most critical tests to find out what theworld knows about your SMTP, POP3, and IMAP servers.
Gathering information
Figure 15-2 shows the banner displayed on an e-mail server when a basic telnetconnection is made on port 25 (SMTP). To do this, at a command prompt,simply enter telnet ip_or_hostname_of _your_server 25 . This brings up a
telnet session on TCP port 25.
In Figure 15-2, it’s pretty obvious what e-mail software type and version the
server is running. This information can give hackers some ideas about possi-ble attacks, especially if they search a vulnerability database for known vul-nerabilities of that software version. Figure 15-3 shows the same e-mail serverwith its SMTP banner changed from the default (okay, the previous one was,too) to disguise such information as the e-mail server’s version number.
Figure 15-2:
An SMTP
banner
showing
server-
version
information.263 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 263
--- Page 287 ---
You can gather information on POP3 and IMAP e-mail services as well by tel-
netting to either port 110 (POP3) or port 143 (IMAP).
If you’ve changed your default SMTP banner, don’t think that no one can figure
out the version. One Linux-based tool called smtpscan ( www.greyhats.org/
outils/smtpscan ) determines e-mail server version information based on
how the server responds to malformed SMTP requests. Figure 15-4 showsthe results from smtpscan against the same server shown in Figure 15-3. Itdetected the product and version number of the e-mail server!
Countermeasures
There isn’t a 100 percent secure way of disguising banner information. I sug-gest these banner security tips for your SMTP, POP3, and IMAP servers:
/H12012Change your default banners to cover up the information.
/H12012Make sure that you’re always running the latest software patches.
/H12012Harden your server as much as possible by using well-known best prac-tices from such resources as SANS (
www.sans.org ), NIST (csrc.nist.
gov), National Security Agency Security Recommendation Guides ( www.
nsa.gov/snac/index.html ), and Network Security For Dummies, by
Chey Cobb (Wiley Publishing, Inc.).
Figure 15-4:
smtpscan
gathers
version info
when the
SMTP
banner is
disguised.
Figure 15-3:
An SMTP
banner that
disguises
the version
information.264 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 264
--- Page 288 ---
SMTP attacks
Some hacker attacks exploit weaknesses in the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
(SMTP). This e-mail communications protocol — which is over 20 years old —was designed for functionality, not security.
Account enumeration
A clever way that hackers can verify whether e-mail accounts exist on a serveris simply to telnet to the server on port 25 and run the VRFY command. TheVRFY — short for verify — command makes a server query to check whethera specific user ID exists. Spammers often automate this method to perform adirectory harvest attack (DHA). It’s a way of gleaning valid e-mail addresses
from a server or domain so hackers know who to send spam messages.
Attacks
Figure 15-5 shows how easy it is to verify an e-mail address on a server withthe VRFY command enabled. Scripting this attack can test thousands ofe-mail address combinations.
The SMTP command EXPN — short for expand — may allow attackers to verify
what mailing lists exist on a server as well. You can simply telnet to your e-mailserver on port 25 and try EXPN on your system if you know of any mailing liststhat may exist. Figure 15-6 shows what this result may look like. It’s simple toscript this attack and test thousands of mailing-list combinations.
You may get bogus information from your server when performing these two
tests. Some SMTP servers don’t support the VRFY and EXPN commands, andsome e-mail firewalls simply ignore them or return false information.
Figure 15-5:
Using VRFY
to verify that
an e-mail
address
exists.265 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 265
--- Page 289 ---
Countermeasures
The best solution for preventing this type of e-mail account enumeration
depends on whether you need to enable the VRFY and EXPN commands:
/H12012Disable VRFY and EXPN unless you need your remote systems to be ableto gather user and mailing-list information from your server.
/H12012If you need VRFY and EXPN functionality, check your e-mail server orcontent filtering documentation for the ability to limit these commandsto specific hosts on your network or the Internet.
Relay
SMTP relay lets users send e-mails through external servers. Open e-mailrelays are one of the greatest problems on the Internet. Spammers and hack-ers can use an e-mail server to send spam or attack through e-mail under theguise of the unsuspecting open-relay owner. 
Keep in mind the following key points when checking your e-mail system for
SMTP-relay weaknesses:
/H12012Test your e-mail server by using more than one tool or testing method.Multiple tests minimize any errors or oversights.
/H12012Test for open relay from outside your network. If you test from theinside, you may get a false positive, because outbound e-mail relayingmay be configured and necessary for your internal e-mail clients.
Automatic testing
Here are a couple of easy ways to test your server for SMTP relay:
/H12012Free online tools.
One of my favorite online tools is located at www.abuse.net/relay.
html . You can perform the anonymous test without entering your e-mail
address — unless you’re an abuse.net member. It immediately displays
the test results in your browser.
Figure 15-6:
Using EXPN
to verify that
a mailing list
exists.266 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 266
--- Page 290 ---
/H12012Other Windows-based tools, such as Sam Spade for Windows. Figure 15-7
shows how you can run an SMTP Relay check on your e-mail server.Figure 15-8 contains the results of this test on my test server, showingthat relaying is enabled.
Some SMTP servers accept inbound relay connections and make it look
like relaying works. This isn’t always the case, because the filtering maytake place behind the scenes. Check whether the e-mail actually made itthrough by checking the account you sent the test relay message to.
Manual testing
You can manually test your server for SMTP relay by telnetting to the e-mailserver on port 25. Follow these steps:
Figure 15-8:
Positive
results from
testing for
an open
SMTP relay.
Figure 15-7:
SMTP relay
check tool
in Sam
Spade for
Windows.267 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 267
--- Page 291 ---
1. Telnet to your server on port 25.
You can do this two ways:
• Use your favorite graphical telnet application, such as HyperTerminal
(which comes with Windows) or SecureCRT ( www.vandyke.com ).
• Enter the following command at a Windows or UNIX command
prompt:
telnetmailserver_address 25
To see what’s entered, you may have to enable local echoing of charac-
ters in your telnet program, such as Hyper Terminal.
You should see the SMTP welcome banner when the connection is made.
2. Enter a command to tell the server, “Hi, I’m connecting from this
domain.” Enter the command like this:
helo yourdomain.com
After each command in these steps, you should receive a different-
numbered message, like 999 OK . You can ignore these messages.
3. Enter a command to tell the server your e-mail address, like this:
mail from:yourname@yourdomain.com
4. Enter a command to tell the server who to send the e-mail to, like this:
rcpt to:yourname@yourdomain.com
5. Enter a command to tell the server that the message body is to follow,
like this:
data
6. Enter the following text as the body of the message:
A relay test
7. End the command with a period on a line by itself.
This marks the end of the message. After you enter this final period,your message will be sent if relaying is allowed.
8. Check for relaying on your server:
• Look for a message like Relay not allowed to come back from the
server.
If you get a message like this returned, SMTP relaying is not
allowed on your server.268 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 268
--- Page 292 ---
You may get this message after you enter the rcpt to: command.
• If you don’t receive a message back from your server, check your
inbox for the relayed e-mail.
If you receive the test e-mail you sent, SMTP relaying is enabled on
your server.
Countermeasures
You can implement the following countermeasures on your e-mail server todisable or at least control SMTP relaying:
/H12012Disable SMTP relay on your e-mail server. If you don’t know whether youneed SMTP relay, you probably don’t. You can enable SMTP relay forspecific hosts if needed.
www.mailabuse.org/tsi/ar-fix.html provides information on dis-
abling SMTP relay on e-mail servers.
/H12012Enforce authentication, if your e-mail server allows it. You may be ableto require such authentication methods as password authentication oran e-mail address that matches the e-mail server’s domain. Check youre-mail server and client documentation for details on setting up thistype of authentication.
E-mail header disclosures
If your e-mail client and server are configured with typical defaults, a mali-cious hacker may find critical pieces of information:
/H12012Internal IP address of your e-mail client machine (maybe the entire IPaddressing scheme)
/H12012Software versions of your client and server and their vulnerabilities
/H12012Hostname
Testing
Figure 15-9 shows the header information revealed in a test e-mail I sent tomy free Web account. As you can see, it shows off quite a bit of informationabout my e-mail system.
/H12012The third Received line discloses my system’s hostname, IP address,server name, and e-mail client software version.
/H12012The X-Mailer line displays the Microsoft Outlook version I used to sendthis message.269 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 269
--- Page 293 ---
Countermeasures
The best countermeasure to prevent information disclosures in e-mail head-
ers is to configure your e-mail server/gateway/firewall to rewrite your e-mailheaders, either changing the information shown or removing it altogether.Check your e-mail server documentation to see whether this is an option.
If full-fledged header rewriting is not available, you may at least be able to
prevent the sending of some critical information, such as server software version numbers and internal IP addresses.
Capturing traffic
E-mail traffic can be captured with a network analyzer or an e-mail packetsniffer and reconstructor.
Mailsnarf is an e-mail packet sniffer and reconstructor. It’s part of the dsniff
package. You can get dsniff from 
www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff (UNIX
variants) or www.datanerds.net/~mike/dsniff.html (Windows).
If traffic is captured, a hacker can do one of the following:
/H12012Compromise one host and potentially have full access to another adja-cent host, such as your e-mail server.
/H12012Exploit known security vulnerabilities in e-mail server, e-mail client, andsoftware.
Malware
E-mail systems are regularly attacked by such malware as viruses and worms.
Figure 15-9:
Critical
information
revealed in
e-mail
headers.270 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 270
--- Page 294 ---
/H12012E-mail is one of the best ways for malware to propagate. Chapter 14
covers malware.
/H12012Hackers often compromise systems by running e-mail services thataren’t being used or that need to be updated.
General best practices for minimizing
e-mail security risks
The following countermeasures help keep messages as secure as possible.
Software solutions
The right software can neutralize many threats:
/H12012Use malware-protection software on the e-mail server — better, the e-mail
gateway — to prevent malware from reaching e-mail clients.
/H12012Apply the latest operating system and e-mail application security patchesconsistently and after any security alerts are released.
/H12012If it makes good business sense, encrypt messages. You can use S/MIMEor PGP to encrypt sensitive messages or use e-mail encryption at thedesktop level or the server or e-mail gateway. (You can use SSL/TLSbetween your e-mail client and server via POP3S or IMAPS or betweenyour e-mail gateway and remote e-mail gateways. I prefer to implementencryption between gateways so that the user doesn’t have to beinvolved.)
It’s best not to depend on your users to encrypt messages. Use an enter-
prise solution to encrypt messages.
Operating guidelines
Some simple operating rules can keep your walls high:
/H12012Put your e-mail server behind a firewall, preferably in a DMZ that’s on adifferent network segment from the Internet and from your internal LAN.
/H12012Disable unused protocols and services on your e-mail server.
/H12012Run your e-mail server on a dedicated server, if possible, to help keephackers out of other servers and information if the server is hacked.
/H12012Log all transactions with the server in case you need to investigate mali-cious use in the future.271 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 271
--- Page 295 ---
/H12012If your server doesn’t need e-mail services running (SMTP, POP3, and
IMAP), disable them — immediately.
/H12012For Web-based e-mail such as Microsoft’s Outlook Web Access (OWA),properly secure your Web-server application and operating system byusing the hardening resources I mention throughout this book.
/H12012If you’re running sendmail — especially an older version — considerrunning a secure alternative, such as Postfix or qmail.
Instant Messaging
The hottest new technology taking networks by storm is instant messaging(IM). Although IM offers a lot of business value, some serious security issuesare associated with it. This is especially true if it’s not managed properly andend users are free to install, configure, and use it in any way they want.
Vulnerabilities
IM has several critical security vulnerabilities, including the following:
/H12012Name hijacking, allowing a hacker to assume the identity of an IM user
/H12012Launching a DoS attack on an IM client, allowing the attacker to takeremote control of the computer
/H12012Capturing internal IP address information (similar to the way it’s dis-closed in e-mail headers)
/H12012Transferring malware, including viruses and malicious Trojan horses
You can remedy most of these vulnerabilities by applying the latest softwarepatches and keeping antivirus signatures up to date. However, two IM vulner-abilities are susceptible to malicious attack, so they deserve a little more dis-cussion. These affect most of the popular IM clients, including AOL InstantMessenger (AIM) and ICQ. These vulnerabilities are just problems with filesharing and log files, but these weaknesses can make all the difference in theworld when it comes to securing your network.
Sharing network drives
The biggest problem with IM clients is the ability to share files. This featuremay be pretty neat for home users or others with stand-alone computers, butit can pose a real security risk to your network and information. Practically272 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 272
--- Page 296 ---
every IM client gives users the ability to share both local and network files.
Figure 15-10 shows an example of file sharing configured in AIM.
Once untrained or careless users share your network drives via their IM
clients, they’ve just granted potentially anyone on their IM network permis-sion to view and copy those files. Figure 15-11 shows a sample of what youcan see over the AIM network.
Figure 15-12 shows some AIM File Transfer settings that can allow any remote
user to place files on your network — malware and all! 
Figure 15-11:
When users
share files
via IM,
others
may see
information
like this.
Figure 15-10:
File-sharing
options
under end-
user control.273 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 273
--- Page 297 ---
If you know of IM users on your network, follow these steps to assess the
security of their software and configuration:
1. Determine IM clients that are running on your network.
You can detect IM software with
• Manual inspection of the local workstation
• A third-party workstation hardware and software inventory 
program
• A network analyzer that shows IM traffic. For instance, you can use
Ethereal to capture and display various types of IM protocols, such
as AOL Instant Messenger (AIM protocol), ICQ (ICQ protocol), andMSNMS (MSN Messenger).
2. Install the IM clients on your own system.
Avoid creating your own security holes: Download and install the latestclient versions, and don’t enable file sharing.
3. Find your network’s IM users.
You can identify IM users by either looking up users with a directorysearch in the IM client (many IM clients publish this information bydefault) or asking users for their handles for all their IM clients.
4. For each user, check settings to see whether they’re sharing files.
It’s often just a simple right-click on their IM handle within the IM soft-ware to copy files to and from their system.
Figure 15-12:
Options to
receive files
in AOL
Instant
Messenger.274 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 274
--- Page 298 ---
Log files
Many IM clients can log all IM conversations. Some clients log all conversa-
tions by default. Have users enabled logging and inadvertently shared theirlog files with the world? It’s a smoking gun for a hacker to use! Figure 15-13shows part of an ICQ conversation stored in communications gobbledygookin a log file found in the 
c:\Program Files\ICQ folder.
Countermeasures
IM vulnerabilities can be difficult to detect, because most rogue IM softwareis desktop-based. If you have a large network, checking every computer forthese vulnerabilities is pretty much impossible. Spot checks can be inaccu-rate, because every desktop and every user can be different.
Even if you disallow IM — or any messaging software — on your network, users
always install it. If you implement these countermeasures, you’re better pre-pared to protect your users from themselves and hackers.
Detecting IM traffic
In addition to a network analyzer, you can detect IM traffic by using the fol-lowing tools:
/H12012IM traffic-detection tools from Akonix (
www.akonix.com ) work like a
network analyzer.
/H12012Rogue Aware ( www.akonix.com/products/rogueaware.asp ) is a free
tool. As shown in Figure 15-14, Rogue Aware detects such traffic on thenetwork as IM and other P2P communications (such as Kazaa andGnutella) and file sharing on the network. I recommend that you check itout and use this tool as part of your ethical hacking toolkit. Ideally, youinstall it on a computer that’s connected to a monitor port on a switchor a hub adjacent to your firewall to ensure that you see all the traffic.
Figure 15-13:
IM log files
revealing
juicy
information.275 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 275
--- Page 299 ---
/H12012Akonix’s Enforcer and L7 Enterprise are commercial utilities that have
more functionality. Other vendors offer similar solutions, such as FaceTimeCommunications (
www.facetime.com ) and IM Logic ( www.imlogic.com ).
If you can justify the cost — which is relatively easy — I recommend thatyou check these products out.
/H12012Desktop auditing utilities can show you which applications are installedand their specific settings. Such products as Ecora’s Enterprise Auditor(
www.ecora.com/ecora/products/enterprise_auditor.asp ),
Microsoft’s Systems Management Server ( www.microsoft.com/
smserver/default.asp ) and some lower-end shareware tools can 
offer this type of functionality.
Maintenance and configuration
In addition to the tools listed in the previous section, you can implementthese IM hacking countermeasures:
/H12012User behavior:
• Have a policy banning or limiting the usage of all P2P software.
• Instruct users not to open file attachments or configure their IM
software to share or receive file attachments.
• Instruct users to keep their buddy lists private and not share their
information.
Figure 15-14:
Akonix
Rogue
Aware
detects IM
logins and
file sharing.276 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 276
--- Page 300 ---
/H12012System configuration:
• Change default IM software installation directories to help elimi-
nate automated attacks.
• Apply all the latest IM software patches.
• Ensure that the latest antivirus software and personal-firewall soft-
ware is loaded on each instant-messaging client.
• Ensure that proper file and directory access controls are in place
to effectively give your users the minimum necessary rights for
their jobs. This countermeasure helps keep prying eyes out ifsomeone can exploit an IM vulnerability.
• If you allow IM on your network for business purposes, consider
standardizing an enterprise-based IM application such as Jabber orLotus Sametime. These applications have more-robust and manage-able security options, which can ensure control.277 Chapter 15: Messaging Systems22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 277
--- Page 301 ---
278 Part V: Application Hacking 22 55784x Ch15.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 278
--- Page 302 ---
Chapter 16
Web Applications
In This Chapter
/H17075Attacking Web applications
/H17075Countering application hacking
Web applications, like e-mail, are common hacker targets because
they’re everywhere and often open for anyone to poke around in. Basic
Web sites used for marketing, contact information, document downloads, andso on are a common target for hackers — especially the script-kiddie types —to deface. However, for criminal hackers, Web sites that store valuable infor-mation, like credit-card and Social Security numbers, are especially attractive.This is where the money is, so to speak.
Why are Web applications so vulnerable? The general consensus is they’re
vulnerable because of poor software development and testing practices.Sound familiar? It should, because this is the same problem that affects oper-ating systems and practically all computer systems. This is the side effect ofrelying on software compilers to perform error checking, lack of user demandfor higher-quality software, and emphasizing time-to-market instead of secu-rity and stability.
This chapter presents Web application hacks to check on your systems. You
can test for literally thousands of vulnerabilities, but I focus on the ones I seemost often. I also outline countermeasures to help minimize the chances thata hacker can carry out these attacks against your Web applications.
Web-Application Vulnerabilities
Hacker attacks against insecure Web applications — via Hypertext TransferProtocol (HTTP) — make up the majority of all Internet-related attacks. Mostof these attacks can be carried out even if the HTTP traffic is encrypted (viaHTTPS or HTTP over SSL) because the communications medium has nothingto do with these attacks. The security vulnerabilities actually lie within eitherthe Web applications themselves or the Web server and browser softwarethat the applications run on and communicate with.23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 279
--- Page 303 ---
Many attacks against Web applications are just minor nuisances or may not
affect confidential information or system availability. However, some attackscan wreak havoc on your systems. Whether the Web attack is against a basicbrochureware site or against the company’s most critical customer server,these attacks can hurt your organization.
Choosing Your Tools
Freeware and commercial tools can help ensure that your tests are compre-hensive and minimize your testing time. All these tools basically work thesame way, with such capabilities as scanning for script vulnerabilities, testingfor invalid user input, and viewing critical files.
My favorite tools are Nikto (
www.cirt.net/code/nikto.shtml ), Nessus
(www.nessus.org ), and SPI Dynamics’ WebInspect ( www.spidynamics.com ).
These certainly are not the only tools available. It’s still a young market for
commercial tool vendors, so keep your eyes peeled for emerging products.
Insecure Login Mechanisms
Many Web sites require users to login before they can do anything with theapplication. These login mechanisms often do not handle incorrect user IDsor passwords gracefully. They often divulge too much information that ahacker can use to gather valid user IDs and passwords.
Testing
To test for insecure login mechanisms, browse to your application and loginin the following ways:
/H12012Using an invalid user ID with a valid password
/H12012Using an valid user ID with an invalid password
/H12012Using an invalid user ID and password
After you enter this information, the Web application probably responds witha message like 
Your user ID is invalid or Your password is invalid .
The Web application may also return a generic error message, such as Your
user ID and password combination is invalid and, at the same time,
return different error codes in the URL for invalid user IDs and invalid pass-words, as shown in Figures 16-1 and 16-2.280 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 280
--- Page 304 ---
281 Chapter 16: Web Applications
Case study in hacking Web applications 
with Caleb Sima
In this case study, Caleb Sima, a well-known
penetration-testing expert, shared an experi-ence performing a Web-application securitytest. Here’s his account of what happened.
The SituationMr. Sima was hired to perform a Web-applica-
tion penetration test to assess the security of awell-known financial Web site. Equipped withnothing more than the URL of the main financialsite, Mr. Sima set out to find what other sitesexisted for the organization and began by usingGoogle to search for possibilities. He initially ranan automated scan against the main servers todiscover any low-hanging fruit. This scan pro-vided information on the Web-server versionand some other basic information, but nothingthat proved useful without further research. Andwhile Mr. Sima performed the scan, neither theIDS nor the firewall noticed any of his activity!Then he issued a request to the server on theinitial Web page, which returned some interest-ing information. The Web application appearedto be accepting many parameters, but as hecontinued to browse the site, he noticed that theparameters in the URL stayed the same. Hedecided to delete all the parameters within theURL to see what information the server wouldreturn when queried. The server respondedwith an error message describing the type ofapplication environment.
Next, Mr. Sima performed a Google search on
the application that resulted in some detaileddocumentation. He found several articles andtech notes within this information that showedhim how the application worked and whatdefault files might exist. In fact, the server hadseveral of these default files. He used this infor-mation to probe the application further. Hequickly discovered internal IP addresses, aswell as what services the application was offer-ing. Now that he knew exactly what version theadmin was running, he wanted to see what elsehe could find.
Mr. Sima continued to manipulate the URL from
the application by adding 
&characters within
the statement to control the custom script. Thisallowed him to capture all source codes files!He noted some interesting filenames, including
VerifyLogin.htm , ApplicationDetail.
htm , CreditReport.htm , and Change
Password.htm . Then he tried to connect to
each file by issuing a specially formatted URL tothe server. The server returned a User not
logged in message for each request and stated
that the connection must be made from theintranet.
The OutcomeMr. Sima knew where the files were located
and was able to sniff the connection and deter-mine that the 
ApplicationDetail.htm file
set a cookie string. With little manipulation ofthe URL, he hit the jackpot! This file returnedclient information and credit cards when a new-customer application was being processed.
CreditReport.htm allowed him to view
customer credit-report status, fraud informa-tion, declined-application status, and a multi-tude of other sensitive information. The lessonto be learned: Hackers can utilize many types ofinformation to break through Web applications.The individual exploits in this case study wereminor, but when combined, they resulted insevere vulnerabilities.
Caleb Sima was a charter member of the X-Force
team at Internet Security Systems and the first member of the Penetration Testing team. He went on to co-found SPI Dynamics (
www.
spidynamics.com ) and become its CTO, as
well as director of SPI Labs, the application-secu-rity research and development group within SPIDynamics.23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 281
--- Page 305 ---
In either case, this is bad news, because the application is telling you not only
which parameter is invalid, but also which one is valid. This means that the
hackers now know either a good user name or password — their work hasbeen cut in half! If they know the username (which usually is easier to guess),they can simply write a script to automate the password-cracking process, andvice versa. They can also use a remote Web login-cracking tool, such as Brutus(
www.hoobie.net/brutus ), to attempt to break in, using a preconfigured file
with user IDs and passwords, or even use it to perform brute-force attacks.
Figure 16-2:
A login 
error in 
the URL for
an invalid
password.
Figure 16-1:
A login 
error in 
the URL for
an invalid
user ID.282 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 282
--- Page 306 ---
Countermeasures
You can implement the following countermeasures to prevent hackers from
attacking weak login systems in your Web applications:
/H12012Any login errors that are returned to the end user should be as genericas possible, saying something like 
Your user ID and password com-
bination is invalid .
/H12012The application should never return error codes in the URL that differen-tiate between an invalid user ID and invalid password, as shown inFigures 16-1 and 16-2.
If a URL message must be returned, the application should keep it as
generic as possible. Here’s an example:
www.your_Web_app.com/login.cgi?success=false
This URL message may not be as convenient to the user, but it helpshide the mechanism and the behind-the-scenes actions from a hacker.
Directory Traversal
A directory traversal is a really basic attack, but it can turn up interestinginformation about a Web site. This attack is basically browsing a site andlooking for clues about the server’s directory structure.
Testing
Perform the following tests to determine information about your Web site’sdirectory structure.
robots.txt
Start your testing with a search for the Web server’s robots.txt file. This
file tells search engines which directories not to index. Thinking like a hacker,you may deduce that the directories listed in this file may contain some infor-mation that needs to be protected. Figure 16-3 shows a 
robots.txt file that
gives away information.283 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 283
--- Page 307 ---
Filenames
Confidential files on a Web server may have names like those of publicly acces-
sible files. For example, if this year’s product line is posted as www.your_Web_
app.com/productline2004.pdf , confidential information about next year’s
products may be www.your_Web_app.com/productline2005.pdf .
A user may place confidential files on the server without realizing that theyare accessible without a direct link from the Web site.
Crawlers
A spider program like BlackWidow ( www.softbytelabs.com/BlackWidow )
can crawl your site to look for every publicly accessible file. Figure 16-4shows the crawl output of a basic Web site.
Complicated sites often reveal more information that should not be there,
including old data files and even application scripts and source code.
Look at the output of your crawling program to see what files are available.
Regular HTML and PDF files are probably okay, because they’re most likelyneeded for normal Web-application operation. But it wouldn’t hurt to openeach file to make sure it belongs.
Figure 16-4:
Using
BlackWidow
to crawl 
a Web site.
Figure 16-3:
A Web
server’s
robots.
txt listing.284 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 284
--- Page 308 ---
Countermeasures
You can employ two main countermeasures to having files compromised via
malicious directory traversals:
/H12012Don’t store old, sensitive, or otherwise nonpublic files on your Webserver. The only files that should be in your 
/htdocs or DocumentRoot
folder are those that are needed for the site to function properly. Thesefiles should not contain confidential information that you don’t want theworld to see.
/H12012Ensure that your Web server is properly configured to allow publicaccess only to those directories that are needed for the site to func-tion. Minimum necessary privileges are key here, so provide access only
to the bare-minimum files and directories needed for the Web applica-tion to perform properly.
Check your Web server’s documentation for instructions to control
public access. Depending on your Web-server version, these access con-trols are set in 
• The 
httpd.conf file and the .htaccess files for Apache
Refer to httpd.apache.org/docs/configuring.html for more
information.
• Internet Information Services Manager settings for Home Directory
and Directory (IIS 5.1)
• Internet Information Services Manager settings for Home Directory
and Virtual Directory (IIS 6.0)
The latest versions of these Web servers have good directory security bydefault, so if possible, make sure you’re running the latest versions:
/H12012Check for the latest version of Apache at 
httpd.apache.org .
/H12012The most recent version of IIS (for Windows Server 2003) is 6.0.
Input Filtering
Web applications are notorious for taking practically any type of input,assuming that it’s valid, and processing it further. Not validating input is oneof the greatest mistakes that Web-application developers can make. This canlead to system crashes, malicious database manipulation, and even databasecorruption.285 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 285
--- Page 309 ---
Input attacks
Several attacks can be run against a Web application that insert malformed
data — often, too much at once — which can confuse, crash, or make theWeb application divulge too much information to the attacker.
Buffer overflows
One of the most serious input attacks is a buffer overflow that specificallytargets input fields in Web applications.
For instance, a credit-reporting application may authenticate users before
they’re allowed to submit data or pull reports. The login form uses the follow-ing code to grab user IDs with a maximum input of 12 characters, as denotedby the 
maxsize variable:
<form name=”Webauthenticate” action=”www.your_Web_app.com/login.cgi”
method=”POST”>
...
<input type=”text” name=”inputname” maxsize=”12”>...
A typical login session would be presented a valid login name of 12 charac-
ters or less. However, hackers can manipulate the login form to change the
maxsize parameter to something huge, such as 100 or even 1,000. Then they
can enter bogus data in the login field. What happens next is anyone’s call —they may lock up the application, overwrite other data in memory, or crashthe server.
Automated input
An automated-input attack is when a malicious hacker manipulates a URL andsends it back to the server, directing the Web application to add bogus datato the Web database, which can lead to various DoS conditions.
Suppose, for example, that you have a Web application that produces a form
that users fill out to subscribe to a newsletter. The application automaticallygenerates e-mail confirmations that new subscribers must respond to. Whenusers receive their e-mail confirmations, they must click a link to confirm theirsubscription. Users can tinker with the hyperlink in the e-mail they received —possibly changing the username, e-mail address, or subscription status in thelink — and send it back to the server hosting the application. If the Web serverdoesn’t verify that the e-mail address or other account information being sub-mitted has recently subscribed, the server will accept practically anyone’sbogus information. The hacker can automate the attack and force the Webapplication to add thousands of invalid subscribers to its database. This cancause a DoS condition on the server or the server’s network due to traffic over-load, which can lead to other issues.286 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 286
--- Page 310 ---
I don’t necessarily recommend that you carry out this test in an uncontrolled
fashion with an automated script you may write or download off the Internet.Instead, you may be better off carrying out this type of attack with an auto-mated testing tool ,such as WebInspect or, or one of its commercial equiva-lents, such as Sanctum’s AppScan (
www.sanctuminc.com ).
Code injection
In a code-injection attack, hackers modify the URL in their Web browsers oreven within the actual Web-page code before the information gets sent backto the server. For example, when you load your Web application from 
www.
your_Web_app.com , it modifies the URL field in the Web browser to some-
thing similar to the following:
http://www.your_Web_app.com/script.php?info_variable=X
Hackers, seeing this variable, can start entering different data into the
info_variable field, changing Xto something like one of the following lines:
http:// www.your_Web_app.com/script.php?info_variable=Y
http:// www.your_Web_app.com/script.php?info_variable=123XYZ
The Web application may respond in a way that gives hackers more informa-tion — even if it just returns an error code — such as software version num-bers and details on what the input should be. The invalid input may also cause
the application or even the server itself to hang. Similar to the case study ear-lier in the chapter, hackers can use this information to determine more aboutthe Web application and its inner workings, which can ultimately lead to aserious system compromise.
Code injection can also be carried out against back-end SQL databases — an
attack known as SQL injection. Hackers insert rogue SQL statements to attempt
to extract information from the SQL database that the Web application inter-acts with. Microsoft has a good Web site dedicated to Microsoft SQL Serversecurity, including Slammer prevention and cleanup, at 
www.microsoft.com/
sql/techinfo/administration/2000/security/slammer.asp . Also check
out the popular and effective Shadow Database Scanner at www.safety-lab.
com/en/products/6.htm .
Hidden field manipulation
Some Web applications embed hidden fields within Web pages to pass stateinformation between the Web server and the browser. Hidden fields are repre-sented in a Web form as 
<input type=”hidden”> . Due to poor coding prac-
tices, hidden fields often contain confidential information (such as productprices for an e-commerce site) that should be stored only in a back-end data-base. Users should not be able to see hidden fields — hence, the name — butthe curious hacker can discover and exploit them with these steps:287 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 287
--- Page 311 ---
1. Save the page to the local computer.
2. View the HTML source code.
To see the source code in Internet Explorer, choose View ➪Source.
3. Change the information stored in these fields.
For example, a hacker may change the price from $100 to $10.
4. Re-post the page back to the server.
This allows the hacker to obtain ill-gotten gains, such as a lower price on
a Web purchase.
Cross-site scripting
Cross-site scripting (XSS) is a well-known Web application vulnerability thatoccurs when a Web page displays user input — via JavaScript — that isn’tproperly validated. A hacker can take advantage of the absence of input filter-ing and cause a Web site to execute malicious code on any user’s computerthat views the page.
For example, an XSS attack can display the user ID and password login page
from another rogue Web site. If users unknowingly enter their user IDs andpasswords in the login page, the user IDs and passwords are entered into thehacker’s Web server log file. Other malicious code can be sent to a victim’scomputer and run with the same security privileges as the Web browser ore-mail application that’s viewing it on the system; the malicious code couldprovide a hacker with full read/write access to the entire hard drive!
A simple test shows whether your Web application is vulnerable to XSS. Look
for any parts of the application that accept user input (such as a login field orsearch field), and enter the following JavaScript statement:
<script>alert(‘You have been scripted’)</script>
If a window pops up that says You have been scripted, as shown in
Figure 16-5, the application is vulnerable.
Figure 16-5:
A sample
JavaScript
pop-up
window.288 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 288
--- Page 312 ---
Countermeasures
Web applications must filter incoming data. The applications must check and
ensure that the data being entered fits within the parameters of what the appli-cation is expecting. If the data doesn’t match, the application should generatean error and not permit the data to be entered. The first input validation of theform should be matched up with an input validation within the application toensure that the input parameter meets the requirement.
Developers should know and implement these best practices:
/H12012To reduce hidden-field vulnerabilities, Web applications should never
present static values that the Web browser and the user don’t need tosee. Instead, this data should be implemented within the Web applica-tion on the server side and retrieved from a database only when needed.
/H12012To minimize XSS vulnerabilities, the application should filter out 
<script>
tags from the input fields.
/H12012You can also disable JavaScript in the Web browser on the client side asan added security precaution.
Some secure software coding practices can eliminate all these issues fromthe get-go if they’re made a critical part of the development process.
Default Scripts
Poorly written Web programs, such as Common Gateway Interface (CGI) andActive Server Pages (ASP) scripts, can allow hackers to view and manipulatefiles on a Web server that they’re not authorized to access, as well as uploadtons of files that can eventually fill the Web server’s hard drive. Attacks suchas the Poison Null attack and Upload Bombing attack against vulnerable CGIscripts written in Perl permit unauthorized access.
Attacks
Default script attacks are common because so many poorly written scriptsare floating around the Internet. Hackers can also take advantage of varioussample scripts that install on Web servers — especially older versions ofMicrosoft’s IIS Web server.
Many Web developers and Webmasters use these scripts without under-
standing how they really work or testing them, which can introduce serioussecurity vulnerabilities.289 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 289
--- Page 313 ---
Some poorly written scripts contain confidential information, such as user-
names and passwords! To test for this, you can peruse scripts manually oruse a text search tool — such as the Search function built into the WindowsStart menu or the find program in Linux or UNIX — to find any hard-codedusernames and passwords. Look for such words as admin, root, user, ID,
login, password, pass, andpwd.
Confidential or critical information that’s embedded in scripts like this is rarelynecessary and is often the result of poor coding practices — convenience oversecurity.
Countermeasures
You can help prevent attacks against default Web scripts: 
/H12012Know how scripts work before deploying them within a Web application.
/H12012Make sure that all default or sample scripts are removed from the Webserver before using them.
Don’t use scripts that have confidential information that’s hard coded.
They’re a security incident in the making.
URL Filter Bypassing
It’s possible for internal employees to bypass Web-content filtering applica-tions and logging mechanisms to browse to sites that they shouldn’t go to —potentially covering up malicious behavior and Internet usage.
Bypassing filters
Malicious employees bypass URL filtering mechanisms by using proxy servers,tunneling Web traffic over nonstandard ports, spoofing IP addresses, and soon. But an even-easier hack is to exploit the general mechanism built into URLfiltering systems that filter Web traffic based on specific URLs and keywords
(words that match a list or meet a certain criteria). Users take advantage ofthis practice by converting the URL to an IP address and then to its binaryequivalent. The following steps can bypass URL filtering in such browsers asNetscape and Mozilla:
1. Obtain the IP address for the Web site.290 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 290
--- Page 314 ---
For example, a gambling Web site ( www.go-gamblin.com ) blocked in
Web-content filtering software has this IP address:
10.22.33.44
This is an invalid public address, but it’s okay for this example; you may
want to filter out Web addresses on your internal network as well.
2. Convert each individual number in the IP address to an eight-digit
binary number.
Numbers that may have fewer than eight digits in their binary form must
be padded with leading zeroes to fill in the missing digits. For example,the binary number 1 is padded to 00000001 by adding seven zeroes.
The four individual numbers in the IP address in Step 1 have these
equivalent eight-digit binary numbers:
10 = 00001010
22 = 00010110
33 = 00100001
44 = 00101100
The Windows Calculator can automatically convert numbers from deci-mal to binary notation:
i. Choose View ➪Scientific.
ii. Click the Dec option button.
iii. Enter the number in decimal value.
iv. Click the Bin option button to show the number in binary format.
3. Assemble the four 8-digit binary numbers into one 32-digit binary
number.
For example, the complete 32-digit binary equivalent for 10.22.33.44 is
00001010000101100010000100101100
Don’t add the binary numbers. Just organize them in the same order as
the original IP address without the separating periods.
4. Convert the 32-digit binary number to a decimal number.
For example, the 32-digit binary number
00001010000101100010000100101100 equals the decimal number
169222444.
The decimal number doesn’t need to be padded to a specific length.291 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 291
--- Page 315 ---
5. Plug the decimal number into the Web browser’s address field, like
this:
http://169222444
The Web page loads easy as pie!
The preceding steps won’t bypass URLs in Internet Explorer.
Countermeasures
If the bypassing of certain Web-content filters is an issue for your network,
ask your content-filtering vendor if it has a solution.
Automated Scans
Automated application-security-assessment tools can find vulnerabilitieswithin a Web application that are next to impossible to find otherwise.
You can’t solely rely on automated tools to test your Web applications. But I
can’t imagine comprehensive security testing without them.
Nikto
Figure 16-6 shows the partial results of a Nikto scan against a default IIS 5.0installation. This scan found that the remote scripts directory is browsableand that the server is vulnerable to XSS. It also identified default scripts.Nikto found 16 potential vulnerabilities out of the 2,000 items checked.
WebInspect
Figure 16-7 shows the output of a WebInspect scan against the default IIS 5.0installation. This scan found XSS vulnerabilities, the IIS-specific MicrosoftData Access Components, and the 
null.printer vulnerabilities. WebInspect
found a total of 208 potential vulnerabilities out of the 3,000 items checked.292 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 292
--- Page 316 ---
Figure 16-7:
The results
of a
WebInspect
Web-
application
scan.
Figure 16-6:
The results
of a Nikto
Web
application
scan.293 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 293
--- Page 317 ---
General Best Practices for Minimizing
Web-Application Security Risks
Keeping your Web applications secure requires ongoing vigilance from an
ethical hacking perspective and from your Web-application developers andvendors. Keep up with the latest hacks and testing tools and techniques.
Obscurity
The following forms of security by obscurity can help prevent automated
attacks from worms or scripts that are hard-coded to attack specific scripttypes or default HTTP ports.
/H12012To protect Web applications and related databases, use differentmachines to run each Web server, application, and database server.
The operating systems on these individual machines should be tested
for security vulnerabilities and hardened based on best practices andthe countermeasures. in Chapter 11 (Windows), Chapter 12 (Linux), andChapter 13 (NetWare).
/H12012Use built-in Web-server security features to handle access controls andprocess isolation, such as the application-isolation feature in IIS 6.0.
This helps ensure that if one Web application is attacked, it won’t neces-
sarily risk any other applications running on the same server.
/H12012If you’re concerned about platform-specific attacks being carried outagainst your Web application, you can trick the attacker into thinkingthe Web server or operating system is something completely different.Here are a few examples:
• If you’re running a Microsoft IIS server and applications, you may
be able to rename all your ASP scripts to have a 
.cgi extension.
• If you’re running a Linux Web server, use a program such as IP
Personality ( ippersonality.sourceforge.net ) to change the
OS fingerprint so the system looks like it’s running something else.
/H12012Change your Web application to run on a nonstandard port. Changefrom the default HTTP port 80 or HTTPS port 443 to a high port number,such as 8877.
Don’t rely on obscurity alone; it isn’t foolproof. A dedicated hacker may beable to determine that the system isn’t what it claims to be.294 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 294
--- Page 318 ---
Firewalls
Consider using these Web-application firewalls to protect your systems and
information:
/H12012A network-based firewall that can detect and block attacks against Webapplications.
• Commercial firewalls are available from such companies as
NetScreen (
www.netscreen.com ), TippingPoint Technologies ( www.
tippingpoint.com ), and Check Point ( www.checkpoint.com ).
• An open-source firewall project called CodeSeeker is maintained by
OWASP (www.owasp.org/development/codeseeker ).
/H12012Host-based Web-application intrusion-prevention applications such as
• BlackICE — my all-time-favorite software application
• Ubizen DMZ/Shield Enterprise ( www.ubizen.com )
• Eeye SecureIIS ( www.eeye.com )
• McAfee Entercept ( www.nai.com )
These programs can detect Web-application attacks in real time and cut
them off before they have a chance to do any harm.
/H12012Find security holes in Web applications before they’re deployed. Use a third-party code-examiner expert or an automated tool, such asFlawfinder (
www.dwheeler.com/flawfinder ), ITS4 (www.cigital.
com/its4 ), and RATS ( www.securesoftware.com/auditing_tools_
download.htm )
Software development is where security holes begin and should end — butrarely do. If you can influence your Web developers, you can really make adifference in the security of your Web applications by encouraging securedevelopment practices from the start. See Appendix A for resources.295 Chapter 16: Web Applications23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 295
--- Page 319 ---
296 Part V: Application Hacking 23 55784x Ch16.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 296
--- Page 320 ---
Part VI
Ethical Hacking
Aftermath24 55784X PP06.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 297
--- Page 321 ---
In this part . . .
Well, now that the hard — or at least technical — stuff
is over with, it’s time to pull everything together,
ﬁx what’s broken, and establish some good practices tomove forward with.
First off, this part covers reporting the vulnerabilities you
discovered to help get upper management buy-in and(more) budget to ﬁx the security problems you’ve found.This part then covers some good practices on plugging thevarious security holes within your systems and patchingeverything up to keep from being hacked. Finally, this partcovers what it takes to manage change within your secu-rity systems for long-term success, including outsourcingethical hacking so you can add even more projects to your
overﬂowing plate! That’s what working in information tech-nology is all about anyway, right?24 55784X PP06.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 298
--- Page 322 ---
Chapter 17
Reporting Your Results
In This Chapter
/H17075Bringing your test data together
/H17075Categorizing the vulnerabilities you discovered
/H17075Documenting and presenting the final results
If you’re looking for a break after testing, now isn’t the time to rest on your
laurels. The reporting phase of your ethical hacking is the most critical
piece. The last thing you want to do is to run your tests, find security prob-lems, and leave it at that. It’s important to make sure that all your time andeffort is put to good use by thoroughly analyzing and documenting what youfound to ensure that security vulnerabilities are fixed.
Ethical hacking reporting includes debriefing upper management or your
client on the various security issues found. You share the information yougathered and give the other parties guidance on where to go from here.Reporting also shows that time, effort, and money are put to good use.
Pulling the Results Together
When you have gobs of test data — from manual observations you docu-mented to detailed reports from the various tools you used — what do youdo with it all? The task at hand is to go through your documentation with afine-tooth comb and highlight with a marker all the areas that stand out. Baseyour decisions on
/H12012Your knowledge as a security professional
/H12012Vulnerability ratings from your assessment tools25 55784x Ch17.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 299
--- Page 323 ---
Many feature-rich security tools assign each vulnerability a risk rating, explain
the details of the vulnerability and give possible solutions, and even referencea specific link to the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) Web site at
cve.mitre.org so you can find out more information about the vulnerability.
For further research, you may also need to reference the vendor’s Web site tofind out more and see whether the vulnerability affects your particular system.
You can plug this information into a table in Excel or in Word. I prefer to go
through everything in hard-copy form because it’s easier for me to read, butyour choice may depend on how much data there is. If you think more highlyof trees, you may want to just read the results off the computer screen andcopy and paste the items that stand out into a new Vulnerabilities to Address
document.
In your document, you may want to organize the vulnerabilities as shown in
the following list:
/H12012Nontechnical Issues
• Social Engineering Vulnerabilities
• Physical Security Vulnerabilities• Miscellaneous
/H12012Workstations
• Operating Systems• Applications• Miscellaneous
/H12012Servers
• Operating Systems• Applications• Miscellaneous
/H12012Other Network Hosts
• Hubs and Switches• Routers• Firewalls• Intrusion-Detection Systems• Miscellaneous300 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 25 55784x Ch17.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 300
--- Page 324 ---
Consider creating a couple of separate lists for these security vulnerabilities:
/H12012Internal vulnerabilities, such as internal hosts and organizational issues
/H12012External vulnerabilities, such as public hosts, business-partner network
connections, and telecommuters
Prioritizing Vulnerabilities
It’s critical to prioritize the security vulnerabilities you’ve found, because manymay not be fixable or not worth fixing. You may not be able to eliminate somevulnerabilities due to various technical reasons, and you may not be able toafford to eliminate others. You need to factor in whether the benefit is worththe effort and cost involved. For instance, if you determine that it will cost$8,000 to encrypt a sales-leads database worth $5,000 to the organization, itmay not make sense. You need to study each vulnerability carefully and weighwhether it’s worth fixing.
Analyze each vulnerability carefully, and determine your worst-case scenarios.
It’s not possible — or not worth trying — to fix every vulnerability that you’vefound.
Here’s a quick-and-dirty method you can use when prioritizing your vulnera-
bilities. You should tweak it based on your needs. You need to consider twomajor factors for each of the vulnerabilities you’ve discovered:
/H12012Likelihood of use: How likely is it that the specific vulnerability you’re
analyzing will be taken advantage of in a malicious way by a hacker, arogue insider, or malware?
/H12012Impact if exploited: The impact is rated based on how detrimental it
would be to the information systems you’re assessing and the organiza-tion as a whole.
Rank each vulnerability, using criteria such as High, Medium, and Low or a 1-through-5 rating (where 1 is the lowest and 5 is the highest) for each of thetwo categories. Table 17-1 shows a sample table and a representative vulnera-bility for each category.301 Chapter 17: Reporting Your Results25 55784x Ch17.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 301
--- Page 325 ---
Table 17-1 Prioritizing Vulnerabilities
Impact Likelihood
High Medium Low
High Unsecured No admin pass- Unencrypted emails
wireless AP word on SQL server being sent
Medium End users with Unauthorized  Tape backups that
Internet-only access when   are not password-access having weak user is away  protected
login passwords from computer
Low Outdated virus Weak encryption Cleaning-crew signatures on a being exploited personnel gaining stand-alone PC unauthorized netdedicated to work access
Internet browsing
The vulnerability prioritization shown in Table 17-1 is based on the qualitativemethod of assessing risks. It’s subjective, based on your knowledge of the sys-tems and vulnerabilities, but you can also consider any risk ratings you getfrom your security tools. Chapter 18 identifies vulnerabilities to focus on.
Reporting Methods
You need to organize your vulnerability information into a nice, pretty docu-ment for upper management or your customer. Ferret out the critical findings,and document them in a way that other parties can understand them withouthaving to be security experts.
Graphs and charts are a plus but not required. Screen captures of your 
findings — especially when it’s more difficult to save the data to a file — can add a really nice touch to your reports.
Document the vulnerabilities in a concise, nontechnical manner:
/H12012Every report should contain the following information:
• Tests that were performed
• Specific dates and times the testing was carried out• Summary of the vulnerabilities discovered• Prioritized list of vulnerabilities that need to be addressed (action
items)302 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 25 55784x Ch17.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 302
--- Page 326 ---
/H12012If it will add value to upper management or your customer, add this
information to your report:
• Steps on how to plug the security holes found
• List of general recommendations to improve overall security
Most people want the hard-copy report to include a summary of the findings —
not everything. The last thing most people want to see is a 5-inch stack of
papers to sift through.
Many managers and customers like receiving raw-data reports from the secu-
rity tools on a CD-ROM. They can reference the data later if they want but don’thave to get mired in hundreds of hard-copy pages of technical gobbledygook.
Your list of action items may include something similar to the following:
/H12012Enable Windows auditing on all servers.
/H12012Put lock on server-room door.
/H12012Harden operating systems based on best practices from SANS (
www.
sans.org ), NIST (crsc.nist.gov ), the National Security Agency
Security Recommendation Guides ( www.nsa.gov/snac/index.html ),
and Network Security For Dummies .
/H12012Use a paper shredder for the destruction of confidential hard-copy 
information.
/H12012Install personal firewall/IDP software on all laptops.
/H12012Apply the latest vendor patches to the Web server.
As part of the final report, you may want to document employee reactionsyou observed when carrying out your ethical hacking tests. For example,were employees completely oblivious or even belligerent when you carriedout an obvious social-engineering attack? Did IT or security staff completelymiss technical tip-offs, such as the performance of the network degradingduring testing or various attacks listed in system log files? You can also docu-ment other security issues you observed, such as how quickly IT or securitystaff responded to your tests or whether they even responded at all.
If an ethical hacking report and all the associated documentation and files
were to fall into the hands of a competitor, hacker, or malicious insider, thatcould spell disaster for the organization. Here are some ways to prevent thisfrom happening:
/H12012Keep the report and associated documentation and files confidential,and deliver them only to those who need to know.303 Chapter 17: Reporting Your Results25 55784x Ch17.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 303
--- Page 327 ---
/H12012Remove these programs and data that a hacker or rogue insider could
use from the report in malicious ways:
• Tools, such as password crackers and network analyzers
• Log files• Test data
I recommend leaving the actual testing steps out of the report. Just answer
any questions on that subject as needed.304 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 25 55784x Ch17.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 304
--- Page 328 ---
Chapter 18
Plugging Security Holes
In This Chapter
/H17075Determining which vulnerabilities to address first
/H17075Patching your systems
/H17075Looking at your security in a new light
Now it’s time to head down the road to greater security. You’ve found
some security vulnerabilities — ideally, not too many serious ones!
These security holes must be plugged before someone exploits them. This is going to require rolling up your sleeves and using a little elbow grease tomake things happen. First, you need to come up with your game plan anddecide which security vulnerabilities to address first. A few patches may bein order, and possibly even some system hardening. This may be a time toreevaluate your network design and security infrastructure as well. I touch on some of the critical areas here. You may also want to refer to the fine bookNetwork Security For Dummies, by Chey Cobb (Wiley Publishing Inc.). Chey
does a great job of covering each of these topics in depth.
Turning Your Reports into Action
It may seem obvious which security vulnerabilities to address first, but it’soften not that black-and-white. The variables involved with each host thatneed addressing include
/H12012Whether the vulnerability can be fixed
/H12012How critical the host is
/H12012Whether you can take the system offline to fix the problem
/H12012How easy the vulnerability is to fix
/H12012Costs involved in purchasing new hardware or software to plug the holes26 55784x Ch18.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 305
--- Page 329 ---
In Chapter 17, I cover the more basic issues of how important and how urgent
the security problem is. You should look at this from a time-management per-spective and address the issues that are both important (high-impact) andurgent (high-likelihood). You don’t want to try to fix the vulnerabilities thatare justhigh-impact or justhigh-likelihood. You may have some high-impact
vulnerabilities that will likely never be exploited. Likewise, you probably havesome vulnerabilities that have a high likelihood of being exploited, yet won’treally make a big difference in the future of the company.
Focus on the highest-payoff tasks — those that are both high-impact and
high-likelihood. Ideally, this will be the minority of your overall number of
vulnerabilities. Then you can go after the less important and less urgenttasks, such as a renaming the administrator ID on a handful of noncriticalstand-alone workstations, as time and money permit, if that’s what youchoose to do.
Patching for Perfection
Do you ever feel like all you do is patch your systems to fix security vulnerabili-ties? If you answer yes to this question, good for you — at least you’re doing it!If you constantly feel pressured to patch your systems but can’t seem to findtime — at least it’s on your radar! Many IT and security professionals don’teven think about patching their systems until they get hacked. If you’re readingthis book, you’re obviously concerned about security and way past that.
Whatever you do, whatever tool you choose, and whatever procedures work
best in your environment — keep your systems patched!
Patching is a necessary evil. The only real solution to eliminating the need for
patches is developing secure software in the first place, but that’s not goingto happen any time soon. The majority of security incidents can be preventedwith some good patching practices, so there’s simply no reason not to patch.
Patch management
Whether you can keep up with the deluge of security patches for all of yoursystems, don’t despair; there are some ways to get a handle on the problem.Here are my three basic tenets of applying patches to keep your systemssecure:
/H12012Make sure all the people and departments that are involved in applyingpatches in your organization’s systems are on the same page and followthe same procedures.306 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 26 55784x Ch18.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 306
--- Page 330 ---
/H12012Have procedures in place for these critical processes:
• Obtaining patch alerts from your vendors.
• Assessing which patches affect your systems.• Determining when patches are applied.
Appendix A lists links to patch-notification systems.
/H12012Make it policy and have a procedure in place for testing patches before
you apply them to your production servers, if that’s possible. Many
patches have undocumented features and subsequent unintended sideeffects — believe me, I’ve experienced this before. An untested patch isan invitation for system termination!
Patch automation
There are various patch-deployment tools you can use to lower the burden of constantly having to keep up with patches, as described in the followingsections.
Commercial tools
I recommend a robust patch-automation application — especially if you have
/H12012A large network
/H12012A network with several different operating systems (Windows, Linux,NetWare, and so on)
/H12012More than a dozen or so computers
There are various patch-automation solutions. Be sure to at least check out:
/H12012Patch Manager from BigFix (
www.bigfix.com )
/H12012HFNetChk Pro from Shavlik Technologies ( www.shavlik.com )
/H12012Ecora Patch Manager from Ecora ( www.ecora.com )
/H12012SysUpdate from SecurityProfiling ( www.securityprofiling.com )
The GFI LANguard Network Scanner product that I use to demonstrate a vulnerability-assessment tool in this book can both check for patches to beapplied and deploy the patches.
Watch the other major vulnerability-assessment tool vendors. They are start-
ing to integrate logic in those programs to deploy patches to address the vul-nerabilities their products find — a process called vulnerability management.307 Chapter 18: Plugging Security Holes26 55784x Ch18.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 307
--- Page 331 ---
Free tools
If you’re running Windows, use one of these free automated tools:
/H12012Windows Update, which is built into Microsoft Windows systems
/H12012Microsoft Baseline Security Analyzer (MBSA)
/H12012Microsoft Software Update Services (SUS) Server
Hardening Your Systems
Even after you patch your systems, you’re still not done. You’ve got to make
sure your systems are hardened from the other security vulnerabilities thatpatches cannot fix. I’ve found over the years that many people stop with patch-ing, thinking their systems are secure, but that’s just not possible. Throughoutthe years, I’ve seen network administrators ignore recommended hardeningbest practices from organizations such as SANS (
www.sans.org ), NIST (www.
nist.gov ), and the National Security Agency ( www.nsa.gov/snac/index.
html ), leaving many security holes wide open.
Network Security For Dummies contains a lot of great resources for hardening
various systems on your network.
I was once involved in cleaning up a hack attack on a Windows NT server 
for a customer of mine. I had been telling them ever since they hired me thatthey needed to let me harden their network from attack. They basically had aserver wide open on the Internet with a public IP address (ouch!) and no fire-wall installed. They were willing to pay me to patch the server, but that wasit. There was only so much that could be done to secure it completely fromthe elements, given their environment and specific needs. They didn’t heedmy advice on at least getting the server behind a firewall, if not reconfiguringthe way their application worked. Neither of these was an option.
Time passed, and nothing happened until one day, a hacker compromised the
server, uploaded FTP server software, and started hosting illegal movies andmusic — effectively locking everyone out the server. After the downtime, lostbusiness, and cost of paying me to finally fix the problem, it ended up costingthem way more than the price of a firewall and a couple of hours of installa-tion time.
This book presents hardening countermeasures that you can implement for
your network, computers, and even physical systems and people. These arethe ones I’ve found to work the best for the respective systems.
It’s absolutely critical to implement at least the basic security best practices.
Whether installing a firewall on the network or requiring users to have strongpasswords — you must do the basics if you want any modicum of security.308 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 26 55784x Ch18.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 308
--- Page 332 ---
Beyond patching, if you follow the countermeasures I’ve documented in this
book, along with the other well-known security best practices that are freelyavailable on the Internet for such network systems (routers, servers, work-stations, and so on), as well as perform ethical hacking tests on an ongoingbasis, you can rest assured that you’re doing your best to keep your organiza-tion’s information secure.
Assessing Your Security Infrastructure
A review of your overall security infrastructure can add oomph to your systems.
Look at the big picture. How is your network actually designed? What about
your building? You should even consider organizational issues such as whetherpolicies are in place, maintained, or even taken seriously. Does upper man-agement take information security seriously, or do they simply shrug it off asanother unnecessary expense?
Using the information you gathered by performing the ethical hacking tests 
in this book, map your network. Update existing documentation — a majornecessity. Outline IP addresses, running services, and whatever else you’vefound out. Although I prefer Visio or other, more-capable network diagram-ming tools, you could even draw out your map on a napkin! Just draw it out.Network design and overall security issues are a whole lot easier to assesswhen you can see them visually.
Are you focusing all your efforts on the perimeter and not on a layered security
approach? Think about how most convenience stores and banks are protected.Their security cameras are focused on the cash registers, teller computers, and surrounding areas — not just on the parking lot or entrance areas. Look at security from a defense in-depth perspective. Make sure that several layers of
security are in place just in case one measure fails, so the malicious user mustgo through various other barriers and jump through other hoops to carry out a hack attack successfully.
Do the same thing with organizational issues as well. Document what security
policies and procedures are in place and how effective they are. Look at theoverall security culture within your company, and see what it looks like froman outsider’s perspective. What would customers or business partners thinkabout how your organization is treating their confidential information?
Looking at your security from a high-level and nontechnical perspective will
give you a new outlook on what else still needs to be done. It takes some timeand effort at first, but after you establish a baseline of security, it will be mucheasier to manage and keep a handle on moving forward as new threats and vul-nerabilities emerge.309 Chapter 18: Plugging Security Holes26 55784x Ch18.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 309
--- Page 333 ---
310 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 26 55784x Ch18.qxd  3/29/04  4:18 PM  Page 310
--- Page 334 ---
Chapter 19
Managing Security Changes
In This Chapter
/H17075Automating tasks
/H17075Watching for misbehavior
/H17075Outsourcing testing
/H17075Keeping security on everyone’s mind
Information security is an ongoing process that must be managed effectively
to be successful. This goes beyond applying patches and hardening systems
every so often. Performing your ethical hacking tests again and again is critical;information security threats and vulnerabilities constantly emerge. Combinethis with the fact that ethical hacking tests are just a snapshot in time view ofyour overall information security, so you have to perform your tests on anongoing basis to keep up with the latest security issues.
You need to consider a few key issues in your ongoing efforts, such as automat-
ing some of the testing, monitoring for malicious use, and even outsourcingsome or all of your ethical hacking and security services. In this chapter, Icover the critical issues that you can consider to help ensure long-term suc-cess in your security efforts.
Automating the Ethical Hacking Process
The ethical hacking tests that can be automated are covered in this book:
/H12012Port scans
/H12012Password-cracking tests
/H12012Vulnerability-assessment tests
You’ve got to have the right tools to automate tests:
/H12012Some commercial tools can set up ongoing assessments and create nicereports for you without any hands-on intervention — just a little setupand scheduling time up front. This is why I like many of the commercial27 55784x Ch19.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 311
--- Page 335 ---
security testing tools. This often helps justify the price of the tools —
especially if you don’t have to be up at 2:00 in the morning or on call 24hours a day to monitor the testing.
/H12012Stand-alone security tools such as Nmap, John the Ripper, and Nessusaren’t enough. You can use the Windows Scheduler and AT commandson Windows systems and cron jobs on UNIX–based systems, but manualsteps are still required.
True security isn’t possible by automating everything. Certain issues can’tbe set on autopilot, such as enumeration of new systems, social engineering,and physical-security walk-throughs. Even the smartest computer “expertsystem” will never be able to accomplish some security tests. Good securityrequires both technical know-how and good old-fashioned experience.
Monitoring Malicious Use
Monitoring for security events is essential for ongoing security efforts. This can be as basic — and mundane — as monitoring log files on routers, firewalls,and critical servers every day or as advanced — and, often, expensive — asimplementing an event-correlation system to keep tabs on every little thing hap-pening on the network. A common method is to deploy an IDS or IDP systemand monitor for malicious behavior. The problem with this and most securitymonitoring solutions is that it can be a very boring yet very difficult task to doeffectively.
Consider dedicating a time every day — such as first thing in the morning —
to check your critical log files from the previous night or weekend to ferretout intrusions and other computer and network problems that could be secu-rity-related. You could also dedicate a person to this task, but do you reallywant to subject someone to that kind of torture?
/H12012Finding some — much less all — critical security events in system logfiles is difficult or impossible. It’s just too tedious a task for the averagehuman to accomplish effectively.
/H12012Some security events, such as IDS evasion techniques and hacks cominginto allowed ports on the network, may not be detected at all, dependingon the type of logging and security equipment you have in place.
Enable as much event logging as possible. You don’t necessarily need to cap-ture all computer and network events, but you should definitely look for cer-tain obvious ones, such as login failures, packets, and unauthorized file access.The preferable way to log security events is to use a syslog server on your net-work and not keep logs on the local host, if at all possible. This can help preventhackers from tampering with log files to cover their tracks. Check out 
www.log
analysis.org for great logging resources.312 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 27 55784x Ch19.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 312
--- Page 336 ---
A couple of good solutions to the security monitoring dilemma are to
/H12012Purchase an event-logging system. A few low-priced yet effective solutions
are available, such as GFI’s Security Event Log Monitor ( www.gfi.com/
lanselm ). Just keep in mind that typically lower-priced event-management
systems usually support only one OS platform: Microsoft Windows. Higher-end solutions, such as GuardedNet’s neuSECURE (
www.guardednet.net ),
offer both basic log management and event correlation to help track downthe source of security problems, as well as the various systems that wereaffected during an incident.
/H12012Outsource security monitoring to a third-party managed security servicesprovider (MSSP). Dozens and dozens of MSSPs were around during theInternet boom days, but only a few strong ones still remain. The value inoutsourcing security monitoring is that the MSSP often has facilities andtools that you may not be able to afford. They also have analysts workingaround the clock and can take the security experiences and knowledgethey gain from other customers and share it with your systems.
When these MSSPs discover a security vulnerability or intrusion, they
can usually address the issue immediately often without even gettingyou involved. I recommend at least checking whether third-party firmsand their services can free up some of your time and resources so youcan focus on other things. Just don’t depend solely on their monitoringefforts; an MSSP can’t catch insider abuse or social-engineering attacks.You’re still going to have to be involved in a limited capacity.
Outsourcing Ethical Hacking
Outsourcing ethical hacking is very popular. It’s a great way for organizationsto get an unbiased third-party perspective on their information security.
Outsourcing ethical hacking is expensive. Many organizations will have to
spend thousands — often, tens of thousands — of dollars, depending on thetesting needed. But it’s not cheap to do all of this yourself!
Outsourcing allows you to have a sort of checks-and-balances system.Outsourcing isn’t free or inexpensive. A lot of confidential information is at
stake, so you must be able to trust your outside consultants and vendors.Consider the following questions when looking for a vendor to partner with:
/H12012Is your ethical hacking vendor on your side or third-party vendors’ side?Is the vendor trying to sell you products, or is it vendor-neutral? Manyvendors may try to make a few more dollars off the deal — which maynot be necessary for your needs. This may be okay, but just make surethat no major conflicts of interest are making you uncomfortable.313 Chapter 19: Managing Security Changes27 55784x Ch19.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 313
--- Page 337 ---
/H12012What other IT or security services does the vendor offer? Does it focus
solely on security?
It can help to find an ethical hacking specialist instead of an IT generalist
organization to do this testing for you.
/H12012What are your vendor’s hiring/termination policies?
Look for measures the vendor takes to minimize the chances that an
employee will walk off with all of your confidential information.
/H12012Does the vendor understand your business needs behind ethical hacking?
Have the vendor repeat the list of your needs back to you to make sure
you’re both on the same page.
/H12012How well does the vendor communicate? Do you trust that the vendorwill keep you informed and will follow up with you in a timely manner?
/H12012Do you know exactly who will be performing the tests? Will one persondo all the testing, or will subject-matter experts focus on the differentareas? This isn’t a deal breaker — it’s just nice to know.
/H12012Does the vendor have the experience to recommend practical and effec-tive countermeasures to the vulnerabilities found?
/H12012Do you get the impression that the vendor is in this to make a quickbuck off the services, with minimal effort and value added, or is thevendor in this to build loyalty with you?
Find a good organization to work with long-term. That will make your
ongoing efforts much simpler.
/H12012Ask for several references, and sample sanitized deliverables from your
vendor. If the vendor cannot produce these, or it seems overly difficult,look for another vendor.
/H12012Run criminal-background checks on every person involved on the ethi-cal hacking project. It’s really cheap. I even slap my own customers’hands when they don’t ask for permission to run a background checkbefore hiring me for ethical hacking projects. If criminal-backgroundchecks aren’t an option, make a thorough Internet search via searchengine.
If your vendor won’t agree to background checks of everyone involved in theethical hacking projects, run — fast — to find another vendor. In addition, ifthe vendor won’t disclose the details of what it’s going to test for (not neces-sarily how the testing will be carried out), or won’t commit to being availablein case problems arise, find another vendor. Also, be wary if your vendortalks openly about the security (or general lack of it) of other clients. Thevendor may just do the same for your organization as well!
Your vendor should have its own services agreement for you to sign, which
should include a mutual nondisclosure statement. Make sure you both signoff on this to help protect your organization in the future.314 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 27 55784x Ch19.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 314
--- Page 338 ---
Outsourcing ethical hacking may make good business sense for you, espe-
cially if you don’t have the time or internal resources. Stay educated on theprocess, and keep tabs on what your vendor is doing during the process.
Instilling a Security-Aware Mindset
Your employees are often your first and last line of defense. Make sure all of your ethical hacking-efforts and money spent on all of your information-security initiatives aren’t wasted due to a simple employee slip-up that givesa hacker the keys to the kingdom.
These elements can help establish a security-aware culture in an organization:
/H12012Make employee awareness of security an active and ongoing process.
/H12012Treat awareness and training programs as a long-term business 
investment.
It doesn’t have to be expensive. You can buy posters to hang up in break
rooms, as well as mouse pads, screen savers, pens, and sticky notes tohelp get the word out and keep security on the top of everyone’s mind.Some great vendors are Greenidea, Inc. (
www.greenidea.com ), Security
Awareness, Inc. ( www.securityawareness.com ), and Interpact, Inc.
(www.interpactinc.com ).315 Chapter 19: Managing Security Changes
Thinking about hiring a reformed hacker?
Former hackers — I’m referring to the black-hat
hackers who have hacked into computer sys-tems in the past — can be very good at whatthey do. Many people swear by it. Others com-pare this to hiring the proverbial fox to guard thechicken house. If you’re thinking about bringingin a former unethical hacker to test your sys-tems, consider these issues:
/H12012Do you really want to reward hacker behav-ior with your organization’s business?
/H12012Claiming to be reformed doesn’t mean he orshe is. There could be deep-rooted person-ality issues you’re going to have to contendwith. Buyer beware!
/H12012Information gathered during ethical hackingis some of the most sensitive informationyour organization possesses. This informa-tion in the wrong hands — even ten yearsafter being gathered — could be usedagainst your organization. Some hackershang out in tight social groups. You may notwant your information being shared in theircircles.
Everyone deserves a chance to explain whathappened in the past. Zero tolerance is sense-less. Listen to his or her story, and use common-sense discretion as to whether or not you trustthis person to help you. The supposed black-hathacker may have actually just been a gray hator even a misguided white-hat hacker whomakes a good fit in your organization.27 55784x Ch19.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 315
--- Page 339 ---
/H12012Get the word on security out to upper management!
/H12012Align your security message with your audience, and keep it as nontech-
nical as possible.
/H12012Lead by example. Show that you take this seriously, and offer evidencethat helps to prove that everyone else should, too.
If you can get the ear of upper managers andend users alike, and put enough
effort forth to make security a priority day after day, you may be able to helpshape the culture in your organization. This can provide security value beyondyour wildest imagination. I’ve seen the difference it makes!
Keeping Up with Other Security Issues
Ethical hacking isn’t the be all, end all solution to information security. It
cannot even guarantee security, but it’s certainly a great start. Ethical hack-ing must be integrated as part of an overall information-security programthat includes
/H12012Higher-level information-risk assessments
/H12012Strong security policies that are enforced
/H12012Solid incident-response and business-continuity plans
/H12012Effective security awareness and training initiatives
This may require hiring more staff or outsourcing more security help as well.
Don’t forget about formal training for yourself and any colleagues. You’ve got
to educate yourself consistently to stay on top of this game.316 Part VI: Ethical Hacking Aftermath 27 55784x Ch19.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 316
--- Page 340 ---
Part VII
The Part of Tens28 55784X PP07.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 317
--- Page 341 ---
In this part . . .
Well, here’s the end of the road, so to speak. In this
part, I’ve compiled what I believe are the absolute
critical success factors to make ethical hacking — andinformation security in general — work in any organiza-tion. Bookmark, dog-ear, or do whatever you need to dowith these pages so you can refer to them over and overagain. This is the meat of what you need to know aboutinformation security — even more so than all of the tech-nical hacks and countermeasures I’ve covered thus far.Read it, study it, and make it happen. You can do it!28 55784X PP07.qxd  3/29/04  4:17 PM  Page 318
--- Page 342 ---
Chapter 20
Ten Tips for Getting Upper
Management Buy-In
In This Chapter
/H17075Staying away from fear, uncertainty, and doubt
/H17075Proving yourself
/H17075Communicating on their level
/H17075Highlighting the benefits
Several key steps exist for obtaining the buy-in and sponsorship that you
need to support your ethical hacking efforts. In this chapter, I describe
the ones that I find to be the most effective.
Cultivate an Ally and Sponsor
Selling ethical hacking and information security to upper managers isn’tsomething you want to tackle alone. Get an ally — preferably, your manageror someone at that level or higher in the organization — who understandsthe value of ethical hacking. Although this person may not be able to speakfor you directly, she can be seen as an unbiased third-party sponsor and cangive you more credibility.
Don’t Be a FUDdy Duddy
Sherlock Holmes said, “It is a capital offense to theorize before one has data.”It’s up to you to make a good case and to put information security and the need for ethical hacking on upper management’s radar. Just don’t blow stuffout of proportion for the sake of stirring up fear, uncertainty, and doubt (FUD).Managers worth their salt see right through that. Focus on educating uppermanagement with practical advice. Rational fears proportional to the threat arefine — just don’t take the Chicken Little route, claiming that the sky’s falling.29 55784x Ch20.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 319
--- Page 343 ---
Demonstrate How the Organization 
Can’t Afford to Be Hacked
Show how dependent the organization is on its information systems. Create
what-if scenarios — kind of a business-impact assessment — to show what can
happen and how long the organization can go without using the network, com-puters, and data. Ask upper-level managers what they would do without theircomputer systems and IT personnel. Show them real-world anecdotal evidenceon hacker attacks, including malware, physical security, and social-engineeringissues — but be positive about it. Don’t approach this in a negative way withFUD. Rather, keep them informed on serious security happenings in their indus-try. Find stories related to similar businesses or industries so that they canrelate. Clip magazine and newspaper articles.
Google is a great tool to find practically everything you need here.Show management that the organization has what a hacker wants — a common
misconception among those ignorant to the threats and vulnerabilities. And besure to point out the potential costs from damage caused by hacking:
/H12012Missed opportunity costs
/H12012Loss of intellectual property
/H12012Liability issues
/H12012Legal costs
/H12012Lost productivity
/H12012Clean-up time and costs
/H12012Costs of fixing a tarnished reputation
Outline the General Benefits 
of Ethical Hacking
In addition to the potential costs listed in the previous section, talk about
how ethical hacking can help find security vulnerabilities in information sys-tems that normally may be overlooked. Tell management that ethical hackingis a way of thinking like the bad guys so you can protect yourself from thebad guys — the Art of War mindset.320 Part VII: The Part of Tens 29 55784x Ch20.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 320
--- Page 344 ---
Show How Ethical Hacking Specifically
Helps the Organization
Document benefits that support the overall business goals:
/H12012Demonstrate how security doesn’t have to be that expensive and can
actually save the organization money long-term.
• Security is much easier and cheaper to build in up front than to
add on later.
• Security doesn’t have to be inconvenient and can enable produc-
tivity if it’s done properly.
/H12012Talk about how new products or services can be offered for a competi-tive advantage if secure information systems are in place.
• Certain federal regulations are met.
• Managers and the company look good to customers.• Ethical hacking shows that the organization is protecting customer
and other critical information.
Get Involved in the Business
Understand the business — how it operates, who the key players are, and
what politics are involved:
/H12012Go to meetings to see and be seen. This can help prove that you’re con-cerned about the business.
/H12012Be a person of value who’s interested in contributing to the business.
/H12012Know your opposition. Again, use The Art of War and the “know your
enemy” mentality — if you understand what you’re dealing with, buy-inis much easier to get.
Establish Your Credibility
Focus on these three characteristics:
/H12012Be positive about the organization, and prove that you really mean busi-ness. Your attitude is critical.
/H12012Empathize with managers, and show them that you understand the busi-ness side.321 Chapter 20: Ten Tips for Getting Upper Management Buy-In29 55784x Ch20.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 321
--- Page 345 ---
/H12012To create any positive business relationship, you must be trustworthy.
Build up that trust over time, and selling security will be much easier.
Speak on Their Level
No one is really that impressed with techie talk. Talk in terms of the business.This key element of obtaining buy-in is actually part of establishing your credi-bility but deser ves to be listed by itself.
I’ve seen countless IT and security professionals lose upper-level managersas soon as they start speaking. A megabyte here; stateful inspection there;packets, packets everywhere! Bad idea! Relate security issues to everydaybusiness processes and job functions. Period.
Show Value in Your Efforts
Here’s where the rubber meets the road. If you can demonstrate that whatyou’re doing offers business value on an ongoing basis, you can maintain agood pace and not have to constantly plead to keep your ethical hacking pro-gram going. Keep these points in mind:
/H12012Document your involvement in IT and information security, and createongoing reports for upper-level managers regarding the state of securityin the organization. Give them examples of how their systems will besecured from known attacks.
/H12012Outline tangible results as a proof of concept. Show sample vulnerability-assessment reports you’ve run on your own systems or from the securitytool vendors.
/H12012Treat doubts, concerns, and objections by upper management as requestsfor more information. Find the answers, and go back armed and ready toprove your ethical hacking worthiness.
Be Flexible and Adaptable
Prepare yourself for skepticism and rejection at first — it happens a lot —especially from such upper managers as CFOs and CEOs, who are often com-pletely disconnected from IT and security in the organization.
Don’t get defensive. Security is a long-term process, not a short-term product
or single assessment. Start small — with a limited amount of such resources asbudget, tools, and time — if you must, and then build the program over time.322 Part VII: The Part of Tens 29 55784x Ch20.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 322
--- Page 346 ---
Chapter 21
Ten Deadly Mistakes
In This Chapter
/H17075Obtaining written approval
/H17075Assuming that you can find and fix everything
/H17075Testing only once
/H17075Having bad timing
Several deadly mistakes — when properly executed — can wreak havoc
on your ethical hacking outcomes and even your job or career. In this
chapter, I discuss the potential pitfalls that you need to be keenly aware of.
Not Getting Approval in Writing
Getting approval for your ethical hacking efforts — whether it’s from uppermanagement or the customer — is an absolute must. It’s your get out of jail
free card.
Obtain documented approval that includes the following:
/H12012Explicitly lay out your plan, your schedule, and the affected systems.
/H12012Get the authorized decision-maker to sign off on the plan, agreeing to the
terms and agreeing not to hold you liable for malicious use or other badthings that can happen unintentionally.
/H12012Get the signed original copy of the agreement.
No exceptions here!30 55784x Ch21.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 323
--- Page 347 ---
Assuming That You Can Find All
Vulnerabilities During Your Tests
So many security vulnerabilities exist — some known and just as many or
more unknown — that you can’t find them all during your testing. Don’t makeany guarantees that you’ll find all security vulnerabilities. You’ll be startingsomething that you can’t finish.
Stick to the following tenets:
/H12012Be realistic.
/H12012Use good tools.
/H12012Get to know your systems, and practice honing your techniques.
Assuming That You Can Eliminate 
All Security Vulnerabilities
When it comes to computers, 100 percent security has never been attainable
and never will be. You can’t possibly prevent all security vulnerabilities. You’lldo fine if you
/H12012Follow best practices.
/H12012Harden your systems.
/H12012Apply as many security countermeasures as reasonably possible.
Performing Tests Only Once
Ethical hacking is a snapshot in time of your overall state of security. Newthreats and vulnerabilities surface continuously, so you must perform thesetests regularly to make sure you keep up with the latest security defenses foryour systems.324 Part VII: The Part of Tens 30 55784x Ch21.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 324
--- Page 348 ---
Pretending to Know It All
No one working with computers or information security knows it all. It’s basi-
cally impossible to keep up with all the software versions, hardware models,and new technologies emerging all the time — not to mention all the associatesecurity vulnerabilities! Good ethical hackers know their limitations — theyknow what they don’t know. However, they certainly know where to go to getthe answers (try Google first).
Running Your Tests without Looking 
at Things from a Hacker’s Viewpoint
Think about how an outside hacker can attack your network and computers.
You may need a little bit of inside information to test some things reasonably,
but try to limit that as much as possible. Get a fresh perspective, and thinkoutside that proverbial box. Study hacker behaviors and common hack attacksso you know what to test for.
Ignoring Common Attacks
Focus on the systems and tests that matter the most. You can hack away allday at a stand-alone desktop running MS-DOS from a 5
1⁄4-inch floppy disk with
no network card and no hard drive, but does that do any good?
Not Using the Right Tools
Without the right tools for the task, it’s almost impossible to get anythingdone — at least not without driving yourself nuts! Download the free tools Imention throughout this book and list in Appendix A. Buy commercial tools ifyou have the inclination and the budget. No security tool does it all. Build upyour toolbox over time, and get to know your tools well. This will save yougobs of effort, plus you can impress others with your results.325 Chapter 21: Ten Deadly Mistakes30 55784x Ch21.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 325
--- Page 349 ---
Pounding Production Systems 
at the Wrong Time
One of the best ways to lose your job or customers is to run hack attacks
against production systems when everyone and his brother is using them. Mr.Murphy’s Law will pay a visit and take down critical systems at the absoluteworst time. Make sure you know when the best time is to perform your test-ing. It may be in the middle of the night. (I never said being an ethical hackerwas easy!) This may be reason enough to justify using security tools and othersupporting utilities that can help automate certain ethical hacking tasks.
Outsourcing Testing and 
Not Staying Involved
Outsourcing is great, but you must stay involved. It’s a bad idea to hand over
the reins to a third party for all your security testing without following upand staying on top of what’s taking place. You won’t be doing anyone a favorexcept your outsourced vendors by staying out of their hair. Get in their hair.(But not like gum — that just makes everything more difficult.)326 Part VII: The Part of Tens 30 55784x Ch21.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 326
--- Page 350 ---
Part VIII
Appendixes31 55784X PP08.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 327
--- Page 351 ---
In this part . . .
In this ﬁnal part of the book, Appendix A contains a
listing of my favorite ethical hacking tools that I cover
throughout this book, broken down into various categoriesfor easy reference. In addition, I list various other ethicalhacking resources that I think you’ll beneﬁt from in yourendeavors. Appendix B talks about the book’s companionWeb site. Hope it all helps!31 55784X PP08.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 328
--- Page 352 ---
Appendix A
Tools and Resources
In order to stay up to date with the latest and great ethical hacking tools and
resources, you’ve got to know where to turn to. This Appendix contains my
favorite security sites, tools, resources, and more that you can benefit fromtoo in your ongoing ethical hacking program.
Awareness and Training
Greenidea, Inc. Visible Statement ( www.greenidea.com )
Interpact, Inc. Awareness Resources ( www.interpactinc.com )
SANS Security Awareness Program ( store.sans.org )
Security Awareness, Inc. Awareness Resources ( www.securityawareness.com )
Dictionary Files and Word Lists
ftp://ftp.cerias.purdue.edu/pub/dict 
ftp://ftp.ox.ac.uk/pub/wordlistspacketstormsecurity.nl/Crackers/wordlistswww.outpost9.com/files/WordLists.html
Default vendor passwords www.cirt.net/cgi-bin/passwd.pl32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 329
--- Page 353 ---
General Research Tools
CERT/CC Vulnerability Notes Database www.kb.cert.org/vuls
ChoicePoint www.choicepoint.com
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures cve.mitre.org/cve
Google www.google.com
Hoover’s business information www.hoovers.com
NIST ICAT Metabase icat.nist.gov/icat.cfm
Sam Spade www.samspade.org
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
Switchboard.com www.switchboard.com
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office www.uspto.gov
US Search.com www.ussearch.com
Yahoo! Finance site finance.yahoo.com
Hacker Stuff
2600 — The Hacker Quarterly magazine www.2600.com
Computer Underground Digest www.soci.niu.edu/~cudigest
Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution book by Steven Levy
Hacker t-shirts, equipment, and other trinkets www.thinkgeek.com
Honeypots: Tracking Hackers www.tracking-hackers.com
The Online Hacker Jargon File www.jargon.8hz.com
PHRACK www.phrack.org 330 Part VIII: Appendixes 32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 330
--- Page 354 ---
Linux
Bastille Linux hardening utility www.bastille-linux.org
Debian Linux Security Alerts www.debian.org/security
Linux Administrator’s Security Guide www.seifried.org/lasg
Linux Kernel Updates www.linuxhq.com
Linux Security Auditing Tool (LSAT) usat.sourceforge.net
Red Hat Linux Security Alerts www.redhat.com/support/alerts
Slackware Linux Security Advisories www.slackware.com/security
Suse Linux Security Alerts www.suse.com/us/business/security.html
Tiger ftp.debian.org/debian/pool/main/t/tiger
VLAD the Scanner razor.bindview.com/tools/vlad
Log Analysis
LogAnalysis.org system logging resources www.loganalysis.org
Malware
chkrootkit www.chkrootkit.org
EICAR testing string www.eicar.org/anti_virus_test_file.htm
McAfee AVERT Stinger vil.nai.com/vil/stinger
PestPatrol’s database of pests research.pestpatrol.com/PestInfo/
pestdatabase.asp
Rkdet vancouver-webpages.com/rkdet
The File Extension Source filext.com 
Wotsit’s Format at www.wotsit.org 331 Appendix A: Tools and Resources32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 331
--- Page 355 ---
Messaging
GFI e-mail security test www.gfi.com/emailsecuritytest
smtpscan www.greyhats.org/outils/smtpscan
How to disable SMTP relay on various e-mail servers www.mailabuse.org/
tsi/ar-fix.html
mailsnarf www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff orww.datanerds.net/
~mike/dsniff.html for the Windows version
Rogue Aware by Akonix www.akonix.com
NetWare
chknull www.phreak.org/archives/exploits/novell
Craig Johnson’s BorderManager resources nscsysop.hypermart.net
NCPQuery razor.bindview.com/tools/index.shtml
Novell Product Updates support.novell.com/filefinder
Remote packetstormsecurity.nl/Netware/penetration
Rcon program at packetstormsecurity.nl/Netware/penetration/
rcon.zip
Userdump www.roy.spang.org/freeware/userdump.html
Networks
dsniff www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff
Ethereal network analyzer www.ethereal.com
ettercap ettercap.sourceforge.net
Firewalk www.packetfactory.net/firewalk
Firewall Informer www.blade-software.com332 Part VIII: Appendixes 32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 332
--- Page 356 ---
Foundstone FoundScan www.foundstone.com
GFI LANguard Network Scanner www.gfi.com
MAC address vendor lookup coffer.com/mac_find
Nessus vulnerability assessment tool www.nessus.org
Netcat www.atstake.com/research/tools/network_utilities
NetScanTools Pro all-in-one network testing tool www.netscantools.com
Nmap port scanner www.insecure.org/nmap
Port number listing www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers
Qualys QualysGuard vulnerability assessment tool www.qualys.com
SuperScan port scanner www.foundstone.com
WildPackets EtherPeek www.wildpackets.com
Password Cracking
LC4 www.atstake.com/research/lc
John the Ripper www.openwall.com/john
pwdump2 razor.bindview.com/tools/desc/pwdump2_readme.html
NetBIOS Auditing Tool www.securityfocus.com/tools/543
Crack ftp://coast.cs.purdue.edu/pub/tools/unix/pwdutils/crack
Brutus www.hoobie.net/brutus
Pandora www.nmrc.org/project/Pandora
NTFSDOS Professional www.winternals.com
NTAccess www.mirider.com/ntaccess.html
TSCRACK softlabs.spacebitch.com/tscrack/index.html
TSGrinder www.hammerofgod.com/download/tsgrinder-2.03.zip333 Appendix A: Tools and Resources32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 333
--- Page 357 ---
War Dialing
Palm ToneLoc Viewer chroot.ath.cx/fade/projects/palm/pTLV.html
PhoneSweep www.sandstorm.net/products/phonesweep
THC-Scan www.thc.org/releases.php
ToneLoc www.securityfocus.com/data/tools/auditing/pstn/tl110.zip
ToneLoc Utilities Phun-Pak www.hackcanada.com/ice3/phreak
Web Applications
2600’s Hacked Pages www.2600.com/hacked_pages
Archive of Hacked Websites www.onething.com/archive 
BlackWidow www.softbytelabs.com/BlackWidow
Flawfinder www.dwheeler.com/flawfinder
ITS4 www.cigital.com/its4
Netcraft www.netcraft.com
Nikto www.cirt.net/code/nikto.shtml
RATS www.securesoftware.com/auditing_tools_download.htm
Sanctum AppScan www.sanctuminc.com
Shadow Database Scanner www.safety-lab.com/en/products/6.htm
SPI Dynamics WebInspect www.spidynamics.com
Windows
Amap www.thc.org/releases.php
DumpSec www.somarsoft.com
Legion packetstormsecurity.nl/groups/rhino9/legionv21.zip
Microsoft Office Patches office.microsoft.com/officeupdate334 Part VIII: Appendixes 32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 334
--- Page 358 ---
Microsoft Security Resources www.microsoft.com/technet/security/
Default.asp
Network Users www.optimumx.com/download/netusers.zip
Rpcdump razor.bindview.com/tools/files/rpctools-1.0.zip
SMAC MAC address changer www.klcconsulting.net/smac
Vision www.foundstone.com
Windows Update Utility for Patching windowsupdate.microsoft.com
Winfo www.ntsecurity.nu/toolbox/winfo
Wireless Networks
AirJack 802.11ninja.net/airjack
AirMagnet www.airmagnet.com
AirSnort airsnort.schmoo.com
Cantenna war-driving kit mywebpages.comcast.net/hughpep
Fluke WaveRunner www.flukenetworks.com
Kismet www.kismetwireless.net
Lucent Orinoco Registry Encryption/Decryption program www.cqure.net/
tools.jsp?id=3
Making a wireless antenna from a Pringles can www.oreillynet.com/cs/
weblog/view/wlg/448
NetStumbler www.netstumbler.com
Pong wireless firmware vulnerability testing program www.mobileaccess.de/
wlan/dl.php/pong_v1.1.zip
Security of the WEP Algorithm www.isaac.cs.berkeley.edu/isaac/
wep-faq.html
The Unofficial 802.11 Security Web Page www.drizzle.com/~aboba/IEEE
Wellenreiter www.wellenreiter.net
WiGLE database of wireless networks at www.wigle.net
WildPackets AiroPeek www.wildpackets.com335 Appendix A: Tools and Resources32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 335
--- Page 359 ---
336 Part VIII: Appendixes 32 55784x AppA.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 336
--- Page 360 ---
Appendix B
About the Book Web Site
This book’s companion Website contains links to all the tools and
resources listed in Appendix A. Check it out at www.dummies.com .33 55784x AppB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 337
--- Page 361 ---
338 Part VIII: Appendixes 33 55784x AppB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 338
--- Page 362 ---
• Numbers & Symbols •
802.11b/802.11i standards (IEEE), 157
2600 – The Hacker Quarterly (magazine), 27
• A •
access controls
Linux systems, 203Web servers, 285
access points (AP), wireless networks
unauthorized, 158–160vulnerabilities, 76, 148
accounts, user
lockouts, 94unused, 94
Active Server Pages (ASP) script attacks,
289–290
ActiveX controls malware attacks, 241–242Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)
poisoning/spoofing, 140–143 
ad-hoc mode (wireless LANs), 153admin account (NetWare), 231admin utilities (NetWare), 228AdRem NetWare management 
programs, 223
Advanced EFS Data Recovery program
(ElcomSoft), 101
AES (Advanced Encryption Standard), 157African Whois (lookup) sites, 44AIM File Transfer security risks, 273AirJack wireless LAN security tool, 148AirMagnet wireless testing device, 150Aironet (Cisco) wireless card, 163AiroPeek (WildPackets) wireless LAN
security tools
local airwave scans, 153–154Monitor utility, 158–159system analysis, 149AirSnort wireless LAN security tool
system analysis, 148WEP-encryption cracking, 156
airwaves, scanning local, 152–154Akin, Thomas (Southeast Cybercrime
Institute), 259
Akonix IM traffic-detection tools, 275–276all-in-one security-assessment tools, 170Amap application-detection software,
200–201
anonymity, of hackers, protecting, 27–28antennas (wireless-network attacks), 150Antigen (Sybari Software) malware-
prevention software, 254
antivirus software, testing, 249–250AOL Instant Messenger security risks, 274AP (access points), wireless networks
default configurations, 162unauthorized, 158–160vulnerabilities, 148
APNIC (Regional Internet Registry for
Africa) lookup site, 44
Apple Remote Access remote-connectivity
software, 106
application servers, security testing, 32Application Service Providers (ASPs), 33application-based attacks, 13–14approvals, written, importance of, 
29–30, 323
ARIN (Regional Internet Registry for North
America) lookup site, 44
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
poisoning/spoofing, 140–144
ASP (Active Server Pages) script 
attacks, 289
ASPs (Application Service Providers), 33assumptions, documenting, 36attachment attacks (e-mail), 260authentication
identifying requirements for, 48weak, 84Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 339
--- Page 363 ---
authorization
importance of, 15, 29–30
tips for obtaining, 319–322written approvals, 323
automated malware attacks, 243automated scans (Web applications),
292–293
automated security assessments, 
35, 311–312
automated-input attacks, 286–287autoresponder attacks (e-mail), 262AVERT Stringer (McAfee) antivirus
program, 250–252
• B •
backdoor system access
for propagating malware, 244using unsecured modems, 106
background checks, 60banner-grabbing attacks
Netcat for, 130–131telnet for, 130testing for, 263–264
BBSs (bulletin board systems), 26behavioral-analysis tools, 252–253believability, 63BigFix Patch Manager software, 213, 307bindery contexts (NetWare), removing,
232–233
BIOS passwords, cracking, 100black-hat (malicious) hackers, 10, 22, 24–25 BlackICE Web-application intrusion-
prevention software, 295
BlackWidow Web-crawling tool
directory traversals, 284function of, 42
blind assessments
versus knowledge assessments, 35pros and cons, 40–41
bombs, e-mail, 258bounced e-mail messages, 49Browse rights (NetWare), 231–233browsers, Web, scanning for 
information, 41
brute-force password attacks, 88Brutus password-cracking software
cracking system passwords, 85cracking Web logins, 282
buffer-overflow attacks, 208–209, 286building infrastructure, 72–73bulletin board systems (BBSs), 26business goals, for ethical hacking plan, 30
• C •
Cain and Abel password-capture 
software, 85
Caldwell, Matt (GuardedNet, Inc.), 149called IDs, 62Cantenna kits, 150case studies
hacking e-mail, 259hacking network infrastructures, 118hacking Web applications, 281hacking wireless networks, 149malware attack, 238physical security issues, 71social-engineering attack, 57war dialing, 107Windows password vulnerabilities, 81
CERT/CC Vulnerability Notes Database
Web site, 49
CGI (Common Gateway Interface) script
attacks, 289–290
Chappell, Laura (Protocol Analysis
Institute), 118
CheckPoint firewall software, 295Chirillo, John ( Hack Attacks 
Encyclopedia ), 12
chkconfig service (Linux), disabling, 203
Chknull password-cracking utility, 85chkrootkit rootkit-detection tool, 254Cisco LEAP protocol WERP keys, 156–157Cisco routers, password vulnerabilities, 85client applications, 32Client Manager (Orinoco) wireless LAN
security tool, 148
client operating systems, 32Cobb, Chey ( Network Security For
Dummies ), 101, 264, 308
code-injection attacks, 286–287340 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 340
--- Page 364 ---
COM ports, identifying, 111
Common Gateway Interface (CGI) script
attacks, 289
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
(CVE) Web site, 49, 300–301
community of hackers, 26CommView for Wi-Fi (TamoSoft) wireless
LAN-analyzer, 153
comprehensive assessment tools, 37–38Computer Underground Digest
(magazine), 27
computers. Seephysical-security attacks
confidential information
and file sharing, 272–273removing from Google Groups, 45stealing off networks, 13
configuration settings
Web servers, 285wireless LANs, 162
connection attacks (e-mail), 261–262console access (NetWare), 217contingency plans, 16, 35COPS file-monitoring program, 208copyrighted material, theft of, 26countermeasures, security. See also
security awareness training; securitypatches
Address Resolution Protocol protection,
143–144
autoresponder attack prevention, 262awareness training, 56, 66–67, 92–93,
315–316
banner grab prevention, 131, 264buffer-overflow attack prevention, 209denial of service attack prevention, 145disabling SMTP relays, 269disabling unneeded services, 201e-mail protections, 260–263, 269–272firewall testing, 133high-impact risks and responses, 305–306instant messaging protections, 275–277keystroke logging, 97–98for Linux systems, 199, 210, 212–213malware attack prevention, 253–254NetBIOS attack prevention, 176–177for NetWare systems, 220, 223–225,
228–234Network File System protection, 207network-analyzer attack prevention,
99–100, 139–140
network-infrastructure attack 
prevention, 146
null connection attack prevention,
184–186
ongoing ethical hacking, 311–312operating system protection, 101–102password protection, 91–94, 96–98, 100port scanning prevention, 127–128
.rhosts and hosts.equiv file attack
prevention, 205–206
remote procedure call protection, 178script attack prevention, 290SNMP attack prevention, 129social-engineering attack prevention,
65–67
URL filter bypass prevention, 290–292war dialing prevention, 114–115Web directory traversal prevention, 285Web-application attack prevention, 283,
289, 294–295
for Windows systems, 173–174wireless LAN protection, 156–157,
159–160, 163
wireless workstation protection, 161–162
Crack password-cracking software, 85crackers, defined, 10cracking passwords
brute-force attacks, 88dictionary attacks, 87–88documenting testing process, 34inference attacks, 84keystroke logging, 97–98NetWare systems, 221–223network analyzers, 98–100in password-protected files, 95–97password-reset programs, 100–101shoulder surfing, 83social-engineering attacks, 83in systems with weak authentication, 84tools for, 79, 85–87weak storage systems, 98on wireless LANs, 156
crashing system during tests, 15341 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 341
--- Page 365 ---
crawlers, Web, 284
criminal hackers, 24–25cross-site scripting (XSS) Web-application
attacks, 288
customer notification, importance of, 31CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures) Web site, 49, 300–301
cyberterrorists, 23–24
• D •
daemons (Linux), scanning, 195–199database server testing, 32DDoS (distributed DoS) attacks, 144Debian Linux system updates, 213Deep Freeze lock down program, 98defaced Web pages, 25delimited files, 182deliverables, clarifying, 30denial of service (DoS) attacks
defined, 13indications of, 137–138during testing, 15types of, 144using IM (instant messaging), 272
desktop auditing utilities, 276DHAs (directory harvest attacks), 265dictionary password attacks, 87–88directional (wardriving) antennas, 150directory-harvest attacks (DHAs), 265directory-traversal attacks, 283–285distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks, 144DMZ/Shield Enterprise (Ubizen) intrusion-
prevention software, 295
DNS queries, 43documentation
of assumptions, 36of test results and recommendations, 
40, 303–304
of testing process, 34–35
domain-name information, 43DOS debug program malware attacks, 243DoS
defined, 13indications of, 137–138during testing, 15types of, 144using IM (instant messaging), 272Draper, John (hacker), 22drop ceilings, security risks, 72dsniff network analyzer
analyzing UNIX systems, 135e-mail packet sniffing, 270malware attacks using, 242
dsrepair NLM (NetWare), 227D-Tective reverse Whois service, 44DumpSec vulnerability-assessment tool
operation system information, 48security settings, 171share permissions, 187user and configuration settings, 182–183
dumpster diving
preventing, 74risks from, 12, 61
• E •
eBlaster (SpectorSoft)
keystroke-logging tool, 97spyware, 241
Ecora
Enterprise Auditor IM traffic-detection
tool, 276
Patch Manager patch-automation
software, 307
Edgar Web site, 43eDirectory (NetWare) directory service
disabling Public browse right, 231–233vulnerabilities, 84
Eeye SecureIIS intrusion-prevention
software, 295
eicar test string, 249–250802.11b/802.11i standards (IEEE), 157ElcomSoft
Advanced EFS Data Recovery 
program, 101
password-cracking utilities, 95–96
elite hackers, 23e-mail attacks
account enumeration, 265–266anonymous addresses, 26bounced messages, 49e-mail bombs, 258malware propagation, 243–244, 255,
270–271
using attachments, 260342 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 342
--- Page 366 ---
using autoresponders, 262
using connections, 260–261
e-mail packet sniffers, 270e-mail servers
SMTP relay, 269testing, 32
employees
security-awareness training, 56, 66–67,
92–93, 315–316
and social-engineering attacks, 55–56, 64
encryption
e-mail messages, 271password databases, 101for test results, 19TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity 
Protocol), 157
user passwords, 82
Enforcer and L7 (Akonix) IM traffic-
detection tools, 276
Enterprise Auditor (Ecora) IM traffic-
detection tool, 276
enumerating (mapping out) networks, 46Ethereal network analyzer, 17, 134EtherPeek (WildPackets) network analyzer,
98–100, 134
ethical hacking. See also software and
testing tools; testing process
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
poisoning/spoofing, 140–144
automating application of, 311–312benefits of, 31collating data and test results, 299–301cracking passwords, 82–91, 97–102data analysis and recommendations, 
20, 302–304
defined, 9–10evaluating results, 20footprinting, 41goals, 10–12, 30–32grabbing banner information, 130–131identifying Web-based risks, 279–293keeping up-to-date, 316limits of, 324Linux file attacks, 204–209Linux system scans, 195–199, 211–212malware intrusion scans, 244–253NetWare system scans, 216–219network analyses, 43–49, 134–140network-infrastructure attacks, 117–121obtaining sponsorship, authorization, 
15, 29–30, 319–322
planning and preparation, 15–19port scanning, 121–128retesting, 20scheduling tests, 30similarity to beta testing, 39similarity to malicious hacking, 39SNMP scans, 129social-engineering attacks, 56–59stealthy versus open approaches, 40–41system crashes, 15timing of tests, 326values, 14–15war dialing, 105–115Windows systems scans, 171–178wireless LAN attacks, 148–163, 158–159 
ettercap (Source Forge) network analyzer
ARP spoofing, 135, 141malware attacks, 242
event-logging systems, 312–313Exchange e-mail system, 84EXPN command (SMTP), 265–266external hacks, 36external system scans, 47
• F •
FaceTime Communications IM traffic-
detection tool, 276
false employees, dangers from, 55–56. 
See also social-engineering attacks
FedCIRC Incident Handling Checklist,
244–245
file names
illegitimate, 245on Web servers, 284
file system. See also password attacks
file-sharing risks, 272–273malware attacks using, 255–256
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) 
vulnerabilities, 200
file-modification auditing programs, 208file/print server testing, 32financial information, scanning for, 60343 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 343
--- Page 367 ---
find command (Linux), 207
fingerprinting
Linux OS, 196–197, 294
Windows OS, 174
Finjan Software Test Center Web site,
252–253
Firewalk (Packet Factory) firewall-testing
tool, 133
Firewall Informer (BLADE Software)
firewall-testing tool, 133
firewalls
e-mail, 263, 271Linux systems, 199NetBIOS attacks, 177testing, 32, 131–133Web applications, 295Windows systems, 173–174
Flawfinder security-hole software, 295Fluke WaveRunner wireless testing 
device, 150
footprinting, 41Fortres 101 for Windows lock-down
program, 98
fping ping utility (UNIX systems), 46FreeZip decompression tool, 89FTP (File Transfer Protocol) 
vulnerabilities, 200
FU rootkit, 240–241
• G •
GetPass login-decryption software, 85GFI Email Security Testing Zone, 250GFI LANguard Network Security Scanner
vulnerability-assessment tool
event logging, 312–313firewall testing, 132patch checking, 307testing Linux systems, 195, 197–198testing NetWare systems, 216, 218–219testing Windows systems, 
170, 172–173, 191
testing wirelessLANs, 149uses for, 121viewing share permissions, 188–189
goals, ethical hacking, 10–12, 30–32Google search engine
Google Groups, 45locating security tools using, 18public information searches, 41–42
government Whois (lookup) sites, 44Greenidea, Inc. Web site, 315
• H •
Hack Attacks Encyclopedia (Chirillo), 12
hacked Web sites, defacing of, 25hacker Web sites, 26hackers. See also ethical hacking
changing view of, 21–22cyberterrorists, 24elite hackers, 23ethical versus malicious, 9–10government agencies, 23hacker community, 26hackers for hire, 24hacktivists, 23–24importance of anonymity to, 27–28intermediate hackers, 23outsourcing, 312–315personality profiles, 22–23reasons for hacking, 24–26script kiddies, 21, 23work methods, 26–27
The Hacker’s Choice software
THC-Amap application-version-mapping
tool, 195
THC-Scan war-dialing programs, 
46, 109–110
hacking tools. Seesoftware and testing
tools
hardening operating systems, 101, 308–309hardening servers, 264hardware. See also physical-security
attacks
network, vulnerabilities of, 75–77for wireless-network attacks, 150
headers, e-mail, 269–270HFNetChk Pro (Shavlik Technologies)
patch-automation software, 307
hidden field manipulation, 287–288high impact security vulnerabilities, 302344 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 344
--- Page 368 ---
honeypots, 27
Hoovers.com Web site, 42–43, 60host names, 46
hosts.equiv file(Linux) attacks, 204
Hyena security-assessment software, 191Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
attacks involving, 14vulnerabilities, 279–280
• I •
ICAT Metabase list of password
vulnerabilities, 82
IDSs (Intrusion Detection Systems), 33IEEE 802.11b standard, 157IM (instant messaging)
reducing risks from, 275–277vulnerabilities from, 272–275
IM Logic IM traffic-detection tool, 276inbound access (modems), 106individualism, 24
inetd.conf service (Linux), disabling,
202–203
inference password attacks, 84information-gathering attacks
banner grabs, 263–264footprinting, 41identifying vulnerabilities, 49–51mapping the network, 43–45penetrating security holes, 51–52for social-engineering attacks, 60–62system scans, 45–49Web searches, 41–42
information-security vulnerabilities
importance of identifying, 11–12network-infrastructure attacks, 13nontechnical attacks, 12sharing system information, 45
infrastructure vulnerabilities, 309input attacks (Web applications)
automated input, 286code injection, 287cross-site scripting (XSS), 287hidden field manipulation, 287–288
instant messaging (IM)
reducing risks from, 275–277vulnerabilities from, 272–275insurance, personal liability, 30intermediate hackers, 23internal hacks, 36internal system scans, 46–47Internet Relay Chat (IRC), 26. See also
instant messaging (IM)
Internet vulnerabilities, 243. See also Web-
application attacks
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), 33Interpact, Inc. Web site, 315intruder lockout, 94Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs)
for Novell NetWare systems, 224–225for service providers, 33
IP addresses and host names
capturing using instant messaging, 272scanning for, 46viewing, 46
IP Personality Web site, 294IRC (Internet Relay Chat), 26. See also
instant messaging (IM)
ISO 177799 security framework, 30ISPs (Internet Service Providers), 33ITS4 security-hole software, 295ITsecurity.com security portal, 18IZArc decompression tool, 89
• J •
Java applets, malware attacks using, 241JavaScript programs, malware attacks
using, 242
John the Ripper password-cracking tool,
17, 85, 88–91
• K •
Kerberos authentication system, 84KeyGhost keystroke-logging tool, 97KeyLogger Stealth software, 97keystroke logging, 97–98Kismet wireless LAN security tool
scanning local airwaves, 153uses for, 148
Knark for Linux rootkit, 240–241knowledge versus blind assessments, 35345 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 345
--- Page 369 ---
• L •
LACNIC (Latin American and Caribbean
Internet Address Registry) lookup 
site, 44
LANguard Network Security Scanner (GFI)
vulnerability-assessment tool
firewall testing, 132testing Linux systems, 195, 197–198testing NetWare systems, 216, 218–219testing Windows systems, 170, 
172–173, 191
testing wireless LANs, 149viewing share permissions, 188–189
LANs (local area networks). Seewireless
LANs (WLANs)
laptop computers
resetting passwords, 100testing, 32
Latin American and Caribbean Internet
Address Registry (LACNIC) lookupsite, 44
LC4 password-cracking tool, 17, 85LEAP protocol (Cisco), 157legacy application configurations, 115legal warnings, 131Legion vulnerability-assessment tool, 
171, 176
likeability, 62Linux Security Auditing Tool (LSAT), 195Linux systems
buffer overflows, 208–209general security tests, 211–212
hosts.equiv file attacks, 204–205
malware attacks, 247–249Network File System attacks, 206–207operating system access, 102password storage locations, 87physical-security vulnerabilities, 209–210
.rhosts file attacks, 204
rogue file permissions, 207–208rootkits for, 240security patches, 212–213system vulnerabilities, 193–194tools for, 194–195unauthorized scans, 195–199unneeded services, 200–201
lock-down programs, 98logged in NetWare server access, 217logging
e-mail, 271instant messages, 275system events, 40, 312–313
logic bombs, 242logins
insecure, 171, 280–282unauthorized, 224–225, 229
lookup sites (Whois lookups), 43–44low impact security vulnerabilities, 302LSAT (Linux Security Auditing Tool), 195lsof tool (Linux)
testing for malware intrusions, 248uses for, 201
• M •
MAC (media access control) addresses
vulnerabilities, 140, 151–152
Macintosh system lock-down programs, 98magazines for hackers, 27malicious hackers
defined, 10monitoring for, 312–313
malware attacks
automated, 243dangers from, 237–239defined, 237logic bombs, 242reporting, 253rootkits, 240–241spyware, 241testing systems for, 245–247Trojan houses, 239–240using e-mail, 243–244, 270–271using instant messages, 272using internal security tools, 242–243using programming interfaces, 241–242using vulnerable ports, 244viruses, 239–240worms, 240346 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 346
--- Page 370 ---
Malware: Fighting Malicious Code 
(Skoudis), 238
malware-protection software, 253–254, 271
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks, 140mapping networks
Google Groups, 45Whois lookups, 43–44, 46
mapping null sessions, 179–180Maven Security Consulting, Inc. 
Web site, 107
MBSA (Microsoft Baseline Security
Analyzer) tool, 169–170, 190–191, 308
media access control (MAC) address
vulnerabilities, 140, 151–152
medium impact security 
vulnerabilities, 302
messaging-system attacks
banner grabbing, 263–264system vulnerabilities, 257–258using e-mail, 258–263using instant messaging, 272–275using Simple Mail Transfer Protocol,
265–272
Microsoft. See also Windows (Microsoft)
systems
Baseline Security Analyzer (MBSA) tool,
169–170, 190–191, 308
.NET application vulnerabilities, 241Software Update Services (SUS) 
Server, 308
Virtual PC system-scanning software, 46
military Whois (lookup) sites, 44Minor Threat (ToneLoc software), 109MITM (Man-in-the-Middle) attacks, 140Mitnick, Kevin (hacker), 22mobile device testing, 32. See also wireless
LANs (WLANs)
modems
identifying COM port, 111physical placement, 115protecting against war dialing, 114–115unsecured, 46, 105–106vulnerability testing, 113–114for war dialing, 109–110
monitoring security events, 312–313Mucho Maas (ToneLoc software), 109• N •
NAT (NetBIOS Auditing Tool) password-
cracking tools, 85, 86
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST)
ICAT Metabase Web site, 49operating system hardening practices,
101, 264, 308
National Security Agency
operating system hardening practices,
264, 308
Security Recommendation 
Guidelines, 101
nbtstat NetBIOS attack program, 175NCP packet signing (NetWare), 
enabling, 230
NCPQuery enumeration software, 216Nessus vulnerability-assessment tool
features, 50, 121firewall testing, 132malware attacks using, 242testing Linux systems, 195, 196–197testing Windows systems, 170
net use command, 247
net view command, 180–181
netbasic NLM (NetWare), 227NetBIOS
attacks on, 175–177 blocking access to, 184vulnerability of, 13
NetBIOS Auditing Tool (NAT) password-
cracking utilities, 85
Netcat banner-grabbing tool
features, 130–131firewall testing, 132–133malware attacks using, 242network scanning, 120
Netcraft Web server-versioning tool, 48–49netfilter/iptables Linux firewall, 199NetScanTools Pro
network scanning program, 120, 128ping tool, 46
NetScreen firewall software, 295347 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 347
--- Page 371 ---
netstat command
testing for malware intrusions, 245–248
testing Linux services, 201
NetStumbler wireless LAN security tool
features, 148scanning local airwaves, 152–153testing unauthorized wireless LAN access
points, 158
NetWare Loadable Module (NLM)
password storage location, 223rconsole attacks, 221rogue programs, 225–229
NetWare (Novell) systems
clear-text packets, 229–230debugger, 243intruder detection settings, 224–225NCPQuery information, 219Novell ConsoleOne access, 232–233password testing, 85port scanning, 217–219Remote Console attacks, 221–223rogue NLM programs, 225–229server-console attacks, 224system vulnerabilities, 215–216testing tools, 216
network cards
promiscuous mode, 135testing for malware intrusions, 249
Network File System (NFS) attacks, 205–206Network Mapper (NMap) port scanner
identifying host IP addresses, 46limits of, 37–38uses for, 17, 18
network mapping
Google Groups, 45Web site privacy policies, 45Whois (lookup) sites, 43–44
network scanning software, 120, 250–252Network Security For Dummies (Cobb), 
101, 264, 308
Network Solutions Web site, 43Network Users (Optimum X)
login-scanning tool, 171vulnerability-assessment tool, 183–184
network-analyzer attacks
how they work, 134–140packet sniffing, 98–100running, 136–139tools for, 17network-analyzer tools
capturing e-mail traffic using, 270malware attacks using, 242monitoring network traffic, 46
network-infrastructure attacks
application-based attacks, 13–14ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
poisoning/spoofing, 140–144
banner grabbing, 130–131case study, 118firewall vulnerabilities, 131–133locations for, 36network analyzers, 134–140operating-system attacks, 13password vulnerability, 85–86port scanning, 46scanning tools, 120shares authentication, 48Simple Network Management Protocol
scans, 129
sniffers, 134–140testing process, 32vulnerability assessments, 119–121
NFS (Network File System) attacks, 206–207Nikto Web-application-evaluation tool
automated scans, 292–293features, 280
NIST (National Institute of Standards and
Technology)
ICAT Metabase Web site, 49operating system hardening practices,
101, 264, 308
NLM (NetWare Loadable Module)
password storage location, 223rconsole attacks, 221–222rogue programs, 225–229
Nmap (Network Mapper) port scanner
features, 17–18, 46 limits of, 37–38ping sweeps, 124scanning systems using, 173testing for malware intrusions, 250–251testing Linux systems, 195, 198, 200–201testing Windows systems, 169using, 120, 126–127
NMapWin port scanner, 46, 48, 120nontechnical attacks, 12not-logged in NetWare server access, 217 348 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 348
--- Page 372 ---
Novell NetWare
clear-text packets, 229–230
debugger, 243intruder detection settings, 224–225NCPQuery information, 219Novell ConsoleOne access, 232–233password testing, 85port scanning, 217–219Remote Console attacks, 221–223rogue NLM programs, 225–229server-console attacks, 224system vulnerabilities, 215–216testing tools, 216
NTAAccess password-resetting 
program, 101
NTFSDOS Profession password-cracking
utilities, 85
null session attacks (Windows), 179–184
• O •
Oechslin, Philippe (Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology), 81
office layout, risks associated with, 74–75omnidirectional antennas, 150open ports, scanning for, 48open source software
hacking tools, 37–38PasswordSafe encryption tool, 92
OpenSSH (Linux) vulnerability testing, 196operating systems
access limits, 101fingerprinting, 174hardening, 264, 303, 308–309rootkits attacks, 240–241vulnerabilities, 48–49, 198–199
operating-system attacks, 13organizational (end-user) password
vulnerabilities, 80–81
Orinoco Registry Encryption/Decryption
(Lucent) program, 161
outbound access (modems), 106outcomes, identifying before starting
hacking process, 30
outsourcing
ethical hacking, 313–315security monitoring, 312–313• P •
Pandora
NetWare hacking suite, 229–230password-cracking tool, 85
password attacks
brute-force attacks, 88cracking tools, 85–87dictionary attacks, 87–88how they work, 86inference attacks, 84keystroke logging, 97–98locations for, 36network analyzers, 98–100recognizing, 79–80resetting programs, 100–101, 226–227shoulder surfing, 83–84social-engineering attacks, 83–84success of, 82Trojan horses, 94
password vulnerabilities
authentication systems, 84Novell NetWare systems, 221–223organizational end-users, 80–81passwords in limbo, 100privacy issues, 64protecting against, 79, 91–94storage issues, 87, 92, 98Windows shares, 177
password-protected files, 95–97Patch Manager (Ecora) patch-automation
software, 307
patches, security
automated, 307–308for e-mail attacks, 271for Linux systems, 212–213managing, 306–307for NetWare systems, 220, 234for Windows systems, 188–190, 308
PatchManager (Big Fix) patch-automation
software, 307
pcAnyware remote-connectivity 
software, 106
penetration testing, 10, 34perimeter e-mail protection, 263personal liability insurance, 30349 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 349
--- Page 373 ---
personnel
security-awareness training, 56, 66–67,
92–93, 315–316
and social-engineering attacks, 55–56, 64
PestPatrol Web site
Auditor’s Edition scanning tool, 251–252
catalog of pests, 245war-dialing programs, 109
PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) encryption
for password databases, 92using, 19
phone line vulnerabilities, 114–115PhoneSweep
telephone line-scanning program, 114war-dialing software, 46
phone-switch software, accessing, 62PHRACK (magazine), 27
physical-security attacks
common, 69–71on Linux systems, 209–210network components and computers,
75–77
versus social-engineering attacks, 55types of, 12using buildings and offices, 71, 74–75using utility systems, 73–74on wireless LANs, 160
Ping of Death DoS attacks, 144ping tool
scanning systems using, 46using from external location, 47
planning and preparation, 15–19port scanning
commonly hacked ports, 122–123indications of, 139information provided by, 121–122,
124–125
mapping programs, 246NetWare systems, 217–219, 227number assignments, viewing, 48for open ports, 46–47ping sweeps, 124tools for, 46
portals, security, 18PortSentry intrusion-prevention 
software, 199
Prescan tool (ToneLoc), 108Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) encryption
for password databases, 92using, 19
privacy
and civil liberty, 26need for, during hacking process, 19policies, vulnerabilities from, 45respecting, during hacking process, 14–15
Procomm Plus remote-connectivity
software, 106
programming interface vulnerabilities,
241–242
PromiscDetect network-analyzer attack
detector, 140
promiscuous mode, 135propagation of malware
automated, 243backdoor access, 244using e-mail, 243–244, 255, 270–271using instant messaging, 272
property, physical, protecting, 69–70protocols, identifying, 47ps malware-intrusion testing tool, 248–249public information, locating, 41–43pwdump, pwdump2 password-cracking
tools, 17, 85, 88–91
• Q •
QualysGuard (Qualys) vulnerability-
assessment tool
features, 50testing Linux systems, 195, 198–199testing Windows systems, 170
• R •
RAS (remote access servers), 105RATs (remote-access Trojans), 
138, 239–240
RATS security-hole software, 295RC4 encryption algorithm, 155Rconj NetWare-management program, 223rconsole (Remote Console, NetWare)
attacks, 221–223
reconnaissance missions
banner grabs, 263–264footprinting, 41350 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 350
--- Page 374 ---
identifying vulnerabilities, 49–51
mapping the network, 43–45penetrating security holes, 51–52for social-engineering attacks, 60–62system scans, 45–49Web searches, 41–42
Recording Industry Association of America
(RIAA) copyright lawsuits, 26
Red Hat Linux system updates, 213red teams, 31reformed hackers, hiring, 315Regional Internet Registry for Africa
(APNIC) lookup site, 44
Regional Internet Registry for North
America (ARIN) lookup site, 44
Register Fly Web site, 43relays (SMTP), vulnerabilities, 266remote access servers (RAS), 105Remote Console (rconsole, Novell
NetWare) attacks, 221–223
Remote password-cracking software, 216remote procedure call (RPC) enumeration,
177–178
remote-access services, 48remote-access Trojans (RATs), 
138, 239–240
repeat dial tones, 106reports, 302–304. See also documentation
resetting passwords
cautions about, 100–101in NetWare systems, 226–227
results, test data, evaluating, 20, 302–304reverse Whois services, 44Rhoades, David (Maven Security Consult,
Inc.), 107
.rhosts files (Linux), attacks on, 204
RIAA (Recording Industry Association of
America) copyright lawsuit, 26
RIPE Network Coordination Centre lookup
site, 43–44
risks, evaluating and ranking, 300–302Rkdet rootkit-detection tool, 254
robots.txt file, searching for, 283–284
Rogue Aware (Akonix) IM traffic-detection
tool, 275–276
rogue modems, 13root passwords, cracking, 82rootkits
detection tools, 254uses for, 240–241
routers, testing, 32RPC (remote procedure call) enumeration,
177–178
Rpcdump port scanning tool, 171, 178r-services (Linux) vulnerabilities, 198, 200
• S •
SAM (Security Account Manager) 
database, 87
Sam Spade for Windows network scanning
program, 43, 109, 120, 267
sandboxes, 241SANS Institute
operating system hardening practices,
101, 264, 308
Top 20 Internet Security Vulnerabilities
consensus list, 50
SATAN (Security Administrator Tool for
Analyzing Networks), 18, 38
scanning local airwaves, 152–154scans, system
banner grabbing, 263–264information obtained from, 47–49penetrating security holes, 51–52using network analyzers, 46–47using port scanners, 46–47using unsecured modems, 46
screen captures, as documentation, 40script attacks (Web applications), 289–290script kiddies, 21, 23scripting program vulnerabilities, 241–242SearchSecurity.com security portal, 18SeattleWireless Hardware Comparison Web
page, 150
SEC filings Web site, 60second dial tones, 106, 110SecureIIS (Eeye) Web-application intrusion-
prevention software, 295
Security Account Manager (SAM) 
database, 87
Security Administrator Tool for Analyzing
Networks (SATAN), 18
Security Awareness, Inc. Web site, 315351 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 351
--- Page 375 ---
security awareness training, 56, 66–67,
92–93, 315–316
security holes, 26–27, 36, 51–52
security infrastructure, assessing and
enhancing, 309
security measures. See also security
awareness training; security patches
Address Resolution Protocol protection,
143–144
autoresponder attack prevention, 262awareness training, 56, 66–67, 92–93,
315–316
banner grab prevention, 131, 264buffer-overflow attack prevention, 209denial of service attack prevention, 145disabling SMTP relays, 269disabling unneeded services, 201e-mail protections, 260–263, 269–272firewall testing, 133high-impact risks and responses, 305–306instant messaging protections, 275–277keystroke logging, 97–98for Linux systems, 199, 210, 212–213malware attack prevention, 253–254NetBIOS attack prevention, 176–177for NetWare systems, 220, 223–225,
228–234
Network File System protection, 207network-analyzer attack prevention,
99–100, 139–140
network-infrastructure attack 
prevention, 146
null connection attack prevention,
184–186
ongoing ethical hacking, 311–312operating system protection, 101–102password protection, 91–94, 96–98, 100port scanning prevention, 127–128
.rhosts and hosts.equiv file attack
prevention, 205–206
remote procedure call protection, 178script attack prevention, 290SNMP attack prevention, 129social-engineering attack prevention,
65–67
URL filter bypass prevention, 290–292war dialing prevention, 114–115Web directory traversal prevention, 285Web-application attack prevention, 
283, 289, 294–295
for Windows systems, 173–174wireless LAN protection, 156–157,
159–160, 163
wireless workstation protection, 161–162
security patches
automated, 307–308for e-mail attacks, 271for Linux systems, 212–213managing, 306–307for NetWare systems, 220, 234for Windows systems, 188–190, 308
security policies, 66security portals, 18security seals, 30security vulnerabilities, ranking, 300–301SecurityFocus.com security portal, 18SecurityProfiling Syspdate patch-
automation software, 307
security-testing tools, overview, 
18–19, 37–38. See also software 
and testing tools
self-replicating viruses and worms, 239–240semidirectional antennas, 150sendmail security vulnerabilities, 200server-console (NetWare)-attacks, 224servers
identifying software used by, 48viewing operating systems, 
applications, 32
services
unneeded, disabling, 199, 272in use, identifying, 47
setpwd NLM (NetWare), 226setspass NLM (NetWare), 226setspwd NLM (NetWare), 226shares (Windows) attacks, 176, 186–189Shavlik technologies HFNetChk Pro patch-
automation software, 307
shoulder surfing, 83Sima, Caleb (SPI Dynamics, Inc.), 281Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)-
based attacks
account enumeration attacks, 265–266banner grabs, 263–264e-mail header disclosures, 269–270e-mail relays, 266–269types of, 14352 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 352
--- Page 376 ---
Simple Network Management Protocol
(SNMP) attacks, 129
Skoudis, Ed (security expert 
and author), 238
Slackware Linux system updates, 213
SMAC MAC-spoofing software, 142–143SMTP
account enumeration attacks, 265–266banner grabs, 263–264e-mail header disclosures, 269–270e-mail relays, 266–269types of, 14
smtpscan banner-grabbing software, 264
Smurf DoS attack, 137–138, 144SNARE intrusion-prevention software, 199sniffdet network-analyzer attack 
detector, 140
SNMP (Simple Network Management
Protocol) attacks, 129
social-engineering attacks
behaviors associated with, 62–64case study, 57cracking passwords, 83deceptive practices, 63–65defending against, 65–67defined, 12, 55–56 and ethical hacking, 56–59versus physical-security attacks, 55system reconnaissance, 43, 60–62
software and testing tools
banner grabbing, 264behavioral-analysis, 252–253capturing e-mail traffic, 270cautions when using, 38choosing correctly, 325desirable features, 38e-mail header disclosures, 269–270e-mail malware propagation, 243–244firewall testing, 132instant message monitoring, 275–276keystroke logging, 97Linux security testing, 195, 213Linux service assessments, 200–201MAC spoofing, 142–143NetWare security testing, 216, 229–230network analyzers, 134–135null session attacks, 179–180password-cracking utilities, 85–87, 95–96rootkit detection, 254spyware scanning, 250–252testing SMTP relays, 266–267vulnerability assessment, 50–51, 280war dialing, 108–111Windows security testing, 168–171Wired Equivalent Privacy encryption
cracking, 156
wireless LAN security testing, 148–149
software, malicious
automated, 243dangers from, 237–239defined, 237logic bombs, 242reporting, 253rootkits, 240–241spyware, 241testing systems for, 245–247Trojan houses, 239–240using e-mail, 243–244, 270–271using instant messages, 272using internal security tools, 242–243using programming interfaces, 241–242using vulnerable ports, 244viruses, 239–240worms, 240
Spector Pro (SpectorSoft)
keystroke-logging tool, 97spyware, 241
SPI Dynamics
Web site URL, 65WebInspect application-evaluation 
tool, 280
spider programs, 284Spies Among Us (Winkler), 57
Spitzner, Lance, Web site, 27sponsorship for ethical hacking
importance of obtaining, 15tips for obtaining, 319–322written approvals, 323
spyware, 241startup files, testing for malware
intrusions, 247–248
stealthy versus open hacking approaches,
40–41
A Step-by-Step Guide to Computer Attacks
and Effective Defenses (Skoudis), 238
strangers, responding to with caution, 
67, 75 353 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 353
--- Page 377 ---
SuperScan port scanner
features, 17, 125–126
identifying malware intrusions, 250–251limits of, 37ping sweeps and port scanning, 46, 120testing Linux systems, 195, 195–196testing NetWare systems, 216, 218testing Windows systems, 170–173
SUS (Microsoft Software Update Services)
Server, 308
SuSE/Novell Linux system updates, 213switches, in Google searches, 42SYN flood DoS attacks, 144SYSKEY encryption tool, 101system auditing feature (NetWare), 233–234system crashes, 14–15system login files, 88system scans
information obtained from, 47–49IP addresses and host names, 46Linux systems, 195network analyzers for, 46–47penetrating security holes, 51–52port scanners for, 46–47unsecured modems, 46Windows systems, 171–173
SysTrust security seal, 30SysUpdate patch-management tool, 213SysUpdate (SecurityProfiling) patch-
automation software, 307
• T •
tablet PCs, testing, 32tarpitting, 262TCP port scans, 125–128TCP Wrappers access-control tool, 203tcpcon NLM (NetWare), testing, 227–228TCP/IP communications
NetWare parameter settings, 234protocol vulnerabilities, 13
technical password vulnerabilities, 82Techno Security Web site, 71telephone system vulnerabilities, 61–62, 106telnet tool
banner grabbing, 130SMTP relay testing, 267–269security vulnerabilities, 200Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP)
encryption, 157
testing. See also ethical hacking; software
and testing tools
capturing clear-text packets, 229–230choosing test systems, 32–33crashing system during, 15for DoS attacks, 145for e-mail header disclosures, 269–270for firewall vulnerabilities, 132–133goals for, 30–32IM (instant messaging) security, 274–275for insecure Web logs in, 280–282Linux security, 195–201locations for, 36logging and documenting, 40for malware intrusions, 244–253for NetBIOS attacks, 174–176NetWare security systems, 216–224process of, 19results from, 19–20, 299–301retesting, 20, 324for rogue file permissions, 207for rogue NLMs, 226for share permissions, 187–189for SMTP relays, 266–267, 266–269timing and timelines for, 33–36, 326for unauthorized access points, 158–159for unprotected shares, 187–189for URL filter bypasses, 290–292for vulnerable malware ports, 244Web directory security, 283–284Windows system security, 171–173,
180–184, 189–191
TFN (Tribe Flood Network) DoS 
attacks, 144
Tiger Linux security-auditing tool, 
195, 211–212
tiger teams, 31Timbuktu for Apple remote-connectivity
software, 106
timing and timelines, 33–36, 326TippingPoint Technologies firewall
software, 295
TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity Protocol)
encryption, 157
toneloc command, 112354 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 354
--- Page 378 ---
ToneLoc (Minor Threat, Mucho Maas)
Phun-Pak Prescan utility, 108
war-dialing program, 108–111
tone.log file (ToneLoc program), 112
tools, security. Seesoftware and testing
tools
traffic
e-mail, monitoring, 270instant messaging, monitoring, 275–276network, restricting, 127–128wireless, 154, 155–156
Tribe Flood Network (TFN) DoS 
attacks, 144
Trinoo DoS attacks, 144Tripwire file-monitoring program, 208Trojan horse attacks
features, 239–240password-cracking, 94tester software, 244–245types of, 245using instant messaging, 272
TrueActive spyware, 241trust
and ethical hacking, 14and social-engineering attacks, 62–63
2600 – The Hacker Quarterly (magazine), 27
• U •
Ubizen DMZ/Shield Enterprise Web-
application intrusion-preventionsoftware, 295
unauthorized logins (Novell NetWire), 229UNIX systems
cracking passwords on, 90e-mail packet sniffers, 270MAC-address spoofing, 142network-analyzer attack detectors, 140for operating system access, 102password-storage locations, 87ping utilities, 46rootkits for, 240–241network analyzer attacks, 134–135wireless LAN security tools, 148
unlimited attack approach, 16, 35unneeded services
disabling, 272security vulnerabilities, 200–201URL filter bypasses, 290–292U.S. government, hacking by, 23U.S. Patent Office Web site, 43user accounts
password protection strategies, 92–94unused, eliminating, 94
user IDs for Web logins, viewing, 280–282utilities, physical, protecting, 73–74
• V •
VBScripts, malware attacks using, 242viruses, 240Vision (Foundstone)
port-mapping software, 246–247system-analyzer software, 169
Visual Basic, VBScript vulnerabilities, 242VLAD the Scanner Linux security-auditing
tool, 212, 195
VMware Workstation system-scanning
software, 46
voice-mail systems, vulnerabilities, 106VPN services, identifying, 48VRFY command (SMTP), 265–266vulnerability-assessment tools. See also
GFI LANguard Network SecurityScanner vulnerability-assessment tool
DumpSec, 48, 171, 182–183, 187Legion, 171, 176Network Users (Optimum X), 183–184QualysGuard, 50, 170, 195, 198–199Walksam, 171, 183
vulnerable systems, criteria for 
identifying, 33
• W •
Walksam vulnerability-assessment tool,
171, 183
WANRemote RAT attacks, 138war dialing
attack process, 106–108case study, 107configuring programs for, 110–111defined, 105dialing-in process, 110–113documenting testing process, 34information gathering stage, 108–109355 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 355
--- Page 379 ---
war dialing (continued)
modems for, 109
protecting against, 114–115scanning modems, ports, 46–47software tools, 109
wardriving (directional) antennas, 150weak authentication, 84weak passwords, 88Web access (NetWare), 217Web browsers, obtaining system
information from, 41
Web login-cracking tools, 281Web pages, defaced, 25Web servers
configuration settings, 285identifying software versions, 48testing configurations, 32testing directory security, 283–284
Web site privacy policies, information
from, 45
Web sites
antivirus software testing, 250banner-grabbing software, 264behavioral-analysis tools, 252Cantenna kits, 150decompression tools, 89defaced Web pages, 25default system passwords, 100dictionary word lists, 88ElcomSoft password-cracking utilities, 95FedCIRC Incident Handling site, 244–245fingerprint-changing tools, 294firewall testers, 133hacker community sites, 26hacker magazines, 27hardening practices information, 101, 264ICAT Metabase list of password
vulnerabilities, 82
INM traffic-detection tools, 275–276keystroke logging tools, 97Lance Spitzner’s, 27Linux security tools, 195, 199, 213lock-down programs, 98logging resources, 312–313MAC-spoofing software, 142–143malware-protection software, 254NetWare management programs, 223password-cracking tools, 85, 282password-resetting program, 101patch-automation applications, 307port-mapping software, 246port-number assignment listings, 48Pringles-can design antenna, 150rconsole attack information, 223Security Accounts Manager (SAM)
database, 87
security training vendors, 315service-disabling utilities, 202–203SMTP relay information, 266–267, 269SNMP scanners, 129for understanding specific malware
attacks, 245
for understanding system vulnerabilities,
49–50
war-dialing programs, 109Web-application security tools, 280, 295Web-crawling tools, 284Whois (lookup) sites, 43–44 Windows security tools, 169–171, 
181, 183, 190
Wired Equivalent Privacy encryption
cracking tools, 156
wireless hardware information, 150wireless LAN security tools, 148–149, 151
Web-application attacks
assessment tools, 17automated scans, 292–293cracking Web logins, 280–283directory traversals, 283–285input attacks, 285–289types of, 279–280URL filter bypasses, 290–292using default scripts, 289–290
Web-crawling utilities, 42WebInspect (SPI Dynamics) Web-
application-evaluation tool, 280, 17, 292–293
Web-server security features, 294WebTrust security seal, 30Wellenreiter wireless LAN security 
tool, 148
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy)
encryption, 155–156, 161
WepAttack wireless LAN-cracking tool, 156WEPCrack password-cracking tool, 156WhatIsMyIP.com Web site, 46Whister Web-application-assessment 
tool, 17
356 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 356
--- Page 380 ---
white-hat hackers, 10. See also ethical
hacking
Whois lookup tools, 43–44, 109
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), 157WiFiMaps Web site, 151WiGLE wireless LAN database Web site,
151–152
WildPackets EtherPeek network-analysis
program, 120–121
Wiles, Jack (The Training Co.), 71Win Sniffer password capture software, 85Windows (Microsoft) systems
cracking passwords on, 89–90e-mail packet sniffers, 270lock-down programs, 98MAC-address spoofing, 142–143malware infection detectors, 245–247NetBIOS attacks, 174–177network-analyzer attacks, 134–135, 140null session attacks, 179–186operating system vulnerabilities, 
101–102, 167–168
password resetting program, 101password vulnerabilities, 81, 87ping utilities, 46remote procedure call enumeration,
177–178
rootkits for, 240–241security tools, 148–149, 168–171share permission vulnerabilities, 187–189system scanning process, 171–174
Windows Registry
blocking access, 184–185examining for malware attacks, 247
Windows Resource Kit security tools, 170Windows Script Host (WSH) malware
attacks, 242
Windows Server 2003
enhanced security, 179, 184share permissions, 187
Windows System Information tool, 111Windows Task Manager, 246Windows 2000/NT
null connection attacks, 185–186security-testing tools, 171share permissions, 186–187unprotected shares, 188–189
Windows Update security patches,
188–190, 308Windows workstation security
enhancements, 188
Windows XP security enhancements, 188Winfo NT security-testing tool, 
171, 181–182
Winkler, Ira (social engineer, author), 57WinNuke DoS attacks, 144Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP)
encryption, 155–156, 161
wireless access points, testing, 32wireless LANs (WLANs)
ad-hoc mode, 153configuration vulnerabilities, 162–163hacking tools and hardware, 148–158physical-security attacks, 160reconnaissance missions, 151–154types of, 154–155unauthorized access points, 158–160unencrypted traffic, 155–157vulnerabilities, 13, 147–148Wired Equivalent Privacy encryption,
155–156
wireless workstations, 161–162
working ethically, 14workstations
testing, 32wireless, 161–162
worms, 94, 240Wotsit’s Format Web site, 245WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access), 157WSH (Windows Script Host) malware
attacks, 242
• X •
xinetd configuration tool, replacing, 203XSS (cross-site scripting) Web-application
attacks, 288
• Y •
Yahoo! Finance Web site, 42–43, 60
• Z •
zombie computers, 28, 65357 Index34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 357
--- Page 381 ---
358 Hacking For Dummies 34 55784X index.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 358
--- Page 382 ---
PERSONAL FINANCE 
Also available:
Estate Planning For Dummies
(0-7645-5501-4)
401(k)s For Dummies 
(0-7645-5468-9)
Frugal Living For Dummies
(0-7645-5403-4)
Microsoft Money “X” For
Dummies (0-7645-1689-2)
Mutual Funds For Dummies
(0-7645-5329-1)Personal Bankruptcy ForDummies  (0-7645-5498-0)
Quicken “X” For Dummies 
(0-7645-1666-3)
Stock Investing For Dummies
(0-7645-5411-5)
Taxes For Dummies 2003 
(0-7645-5475-1)
Also available:
Business Plans Kit ForDummies (0-7645-5365-8)
Consulting For Dummies 
(0-7645-5034-9)
Cool Careers For Dummies 
(0-7645-5345-3)
Human Resources Kit For
Dummies (0-7645-5131-0)
Managing For Dummies 
(1-5688-4858-7)QuickBooks All-in-One DeskReference For Dummies (0-7645-1963-8)
Selling For Dummies 
(0-7645-5363-1)
Small Business Kit For
Dummies (0-7645-5093-4)
Starting an eBay Business For
Dummies (0-7645-1547-0) The easy way to get more done and have more fun
Available wherever books are sold.
Go to www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974 to order direct.
BUSINESS & CAREERS
Also available:
Controlling Cholesterol For
Dummies (0-7645-5440-9)
Dieting For Dummies 
(0-7645-5126-4)
High Blood Pressure For
Dummies (0-7645-5424-7)
Martial Arts For Dummies 
(0-7645-5358-5)
Menopause For Dummies
(0-7645-5458-1)Nutrition For Dummies (0-7645-5180-9)
Power Yoga For Dummies 
(0-7645-5342-9)
Thyroid For Dummies 
(0-7645-5385-2)
Weight Training For Dummies
(0-7645-5168-X)
Yoga For Dummies 
(0-7645-5117-5)HEAL TH, SPORTS & FITNESS0-7645-5231-7 0-7645-2431-3 0-7645-5331-3
0-7645-5314-3 0-7645-5307-0 0-7645-5471-9
0-7645-5167-1 0-7645-5146-9 0-7645-5154-X35 55784X BOB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 359
--- Page 383 ---
Also available:
America’s National Parks For
Dummies (0-7645-6204-5)
Caribbean For Dummies 
(0-7645-5445-X)
Cruise Vacations For
Dummies 2003(0-7645-5459-X)
Europe For Dummies 
(0-7645-5456-5)
Ireland For Dummies 
(0-7645-6199-5)
France For Dummies
(0-7645-6292-4)London For Dummies (0-7645-5416-6)
Mexico’s Beach Resorts For
Dummies (0-7645-6262-2)
Paris For Dummies
(0-7645-5494-8)
RV Vacations For Dummies
(0-7645-5443-3)
Walt Disney World & Orlando
For Dummies (0-7645-5444-1)
Available wherever books are sold. Go to www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974 to order direct.A world of resources to help you grow
HOME, GARDEN & HOBBIES
Also available:
Auto Repair For Dummies 
(0-7645-5089-6)
Chess For Dummies 
(0-7645-5003-9)
Home Maintenance For
Dummies (0-7645-5215-5)
Organizing For Dummies 
(0-7645-5300-3)
Piano For Dummies 
(0-7645-5105-1)Poker For Dummies (0-7645-5232-5)
Quilting For Dummies 
(0-7645-5118-3)
Rock Guitar For Dummies 
(0-7645-5356-9)
Roses For Dummies 
(0-7645-5202-3)
Sewing For Dummies 
(0-7645-5137-X)
Also available:
Bartending For Dummies (0-7645-5051-9)
Chinese Cooking For
Dummies (0-7645-5247-3)
Christmas Cooking For
Dummies (0-7645-5407-7)
Diabetes Cookbook For
Dummies (0-7645-5230-9)Grilling For Dummies (0-7645-5076-4)
Low-Fat Cooking For
Dummies (0-7645-5035-7)
Slow Cookers For Dummies
(0-7645-5240-6) 
FOOD & WINE
TRAVEL0-7645-5295-3 0-7645-5130-2 0-7645-5106-X
0-7645-5250-3 0-7645-5390-9 0-7645-5114-0
0-7645-5453-0 0-7645-5438-7 0-7645-5448-4 35 55784X BOB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 360
--- Page 384 ---
Available wherever books are sold. Go to www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974 to order direct.Plain-English solutions for everyday challenges
COMPUTER BASICS
Also available:
PCs All-in-One Desk
Reference For Dummies (0-7645-0791-5)
Pocket PC For Dummies 
(0-7645-1640-X)
Treo and Visor For Dummies
(0-7645-1673-6)
Troubleshooting Your PC For
Dummies (0-7645-1669-8)Upgrading & Fixing PCs ForDummies (0-7645-1665-5)
Windows XP For Dummies 
(0-7645-0893-8)
Windows XP For Dummies
Quick Reference (0-7645-0897-0)
Also available:
Excel Data Analysis ForDummies (0-7645-1661-2)
Excel 2002 All-in-One Desk
Reference For Dummies (0-7645-1794-5)
Excel 2002 For Dummies
Quick Reference (0-7645-0829-6)
GoldMine “X” For Dummies 
(0-7645-0845-8)Microsoft CRM For Dummies(0-7645-1698-1)
Microsoft Project 2002 For
Dummies (0-7645-1628-0)
Office XP For Dummies 
(0-7645-0830-X)
Outlook 2002 For Dummies
(0-7645-0828-8) 
BUSINESS SOFTWARE0-7645-0838-5 0-7645-1663-9 0-7645-1548-9
0-7645-0822-9 0-7645-0839-3 0-7645-0819-9
• Find listings of even more For Dummies titles
• Browse online articles 
• Sign up for Dummies eTips™
• Check out For Dummies fitness videos and other products
• Order from our online bookstoreGet smart! Visit www.dummies.com
™35 55784X BOB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 361
--- Page 385 ---
Also available:
Adobe Acrobat 5 PDF For
Dummies (0-7645-1652-3)
Fireworks 4 For Dummies 
(0-7645-0804-0)
Illustrator 10 For Dummies 
(0-7645-3636-2)QuarkXPress 5 For Dummies(0-7645-0643-9)
Visio 2000 For Dummies 
(0-7645-0635-8)
Available wherever books are sold. Go to www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974 to order direct.Helping you expand your horizons and realize your potential
INTERNET
Also available:
America Online 7.0 For
Dummies (0-7645-1624-8)
Genealogy Online For
Dummies (0-7645-0807-5)
The Internet All-in-One Desk
Reference For Dummies (0-7645-1659-0)
Internet Explorer 6 For
Dummies (0-7645-1344-3)The Internet For DummiesQuick Reference (0-7645-1645-0)
Internet Privacy For Dummies
(0-7645-0846-6)
Researching Online For
Dummies (0-7645-0546-7)
Starting an Online Business
For Dummies (0-7645-1655-8)
Also available:
CD and DVD Recording ForDummies (0-7645-1627-2)
Digital Photography 
All-in-One Desk ReferenceFor Dummies (0-7645-1800-3)
Digital Photography For
Dummies Quick Reference (0-7645-0750-8)
Home Recording for
Musicians For Dummies (0-7645-1634-5)MP3 For Dummies (0-7645-0858-X)
Paint Shop Pro “X” For
Dummies (0-7645-2440-2)
Photo Retouching &
Restoration For Dummies (0-7645-1662-0)
Scanners For Dummies 
(0-7645-0783-4)
DIGITAL MEDIA
GRAPHICS0-7645-0894-6 0-7645-1659-0 0-7645-1642-6
0-7645-1664-7 0-7645-1675-2 0-7645-0806-7
0-7645-0817-2 0-7645-1651-5 0-7645-0895-435 55784X BOB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 362
--- Page 386 ---
Available wherever books are sold. Go to www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974 to order direct.The advice and explanations you need to succeed
Also available:
Chemistry For Dummies 
(0-7645-5430-1)
English Grammar For
Dummies (0-7645-5322-4)
French For Dummies 
(0-7645-5193-0)
The GMAT For Dummies 
(0-7645-5251-1) 
Inglés Para Dummies 
(0-7645-5427-1)Italian For Dummies (0-7645-5196-5)
Research Papers For
Dummies (0-7645-5426-3)
The SAT I For Dummies 
(0-7645-5472-7)
U.S. History For Dummies 
(0-7645-5249-X)
World History For Dummies
(0-7645-5242-2)SELF-HELP , SPIRITUALITY & RELIGION
Also available:
The Bible For Dummies (0-7645-5296-1)
Buddhism For Dummies 
(0-7645-5359-3)
Christian Prayer For Dummies
(0-7645-5500-6)
Dating For Dummies 
(0-7645-5072-1)
Judaism For Dummies 
(0-7645-5299-6)Potty Training For Dummies(0-7645-5417-4)
Pregnancy For Dummies 
(0-7645-5074-8)
Rekindling Romance For
Dummies (0-7645-5303-8)
Spirituality For Dummies 
(0-7645-5298-8)
Weddings For Dummies 
(0-7645-5055-1) 
Also available:
Labrador Retrievers ForDummies (0-7645-5281-3)
Aquariums For Dummies  
(0-7645-5156-6)
Birds For Dummies  
(0-7645-5139-6)
Dogs For Dummies 
(0-7645-5274-0)
Ferrets For Dummies  
(0-7645-5259-7)German Shepherds ForDummies  (0-7645-5280-5)
Golden Retrievers For
Dummies  (0-7645-5267-8)
Horses For Dummies  
(0-7645-5138-8)
Jack Russell Terriers For
Dummies (0-7645-5268-6)
Puppies Raising & Training
Diary For Dummies  (0-7645-0876-8)
PETS
EDUCATION & TEST PREPARATION0-7645-5302-X 0-7645-5418-2 0-7645-5264-3
0-7645-5255-4 0-7645-5286-4 0-7645-5275-9 
0-7645-5194-9 0-7645-5325-9 0-7645-5210-435 55784X BOB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 363
--- Page 387 ---
WEB DEVELOPMENT
Also available:
ASP .NET For Dummies 
(0-7645-0866-0)
Building a Web Site For
Dummies (0-7645-0720-6)
ColdFusion “MX” For
Dummies (0-7645-1672-8)
Creating Web Pages 
All-in-One Desk ReferenceFor Dummies (0-7645-1542-X)FrontPage 2002 For Dummies(0-7645-0821-0)
HTML 4 For Dummies Quick
Reference (0-7645-0721-4)
Macromedia Studio “MX”
All-in-One Desk ReferenceFor Dummies (0-7645-1799-6)
Web Design For Dummies 
(0-7645-0823-7)
Also available:
Beginning Programming ForDummies(0-7645-0835-0)
Crystal Reports “X”
For Dummies (0-7645-1641-8)
Java & XML For Dummies 
(0-7645-1658-2)
Java 2 For Dummies 
(0-7645-0765-6)
JavaScript For Dummies
(0-7645-0633-1)
Oracle9 iFor Dummies 
(0-7645-0880-6)Perl For Dummies 
(0-7645-0776-1)
PHP and MySQL For
Dummies (0-7645-1650-7)
SQL For Dummies
(0-7645-0737-0)
VisualBasic .NET For
Dummies (0-7645-0867-9)
Visual Studio .NET All-in-One
Desk Reference For Dummies(0-7645-1626-4)We take the mystery out of complicated subjects
Available wherever books are sold.
Go to www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974 to order direct.
PROGRAMMING & DATABASES
Also available:
CCNP All-in-One Certification
For Dummies (0-7645-1648-5)
Cisco Networking For
Dummies (0-7645-1668-X)
CISSP For Dummies 
(0-7645-1670-1)
CIW Foundations For
Dummies with CD-ROM(0-7645-1635-3)Firewalls For Dummies (0-7645-0884-9)
Home Networking For
Dummies (0-7645-0857-1)
Red Hat Linux All-in-One
Desk Reference For Dummies(0-7645-2442-9)
TCP/IP For Dummies
(0-7645-1760-0)
UNIX For Dummies
(0-7645-0419-3) LINUX, NETWORKING & CERTIFICATION0-7645-1643-4 0-7645-0723-0 0-7645-1630-2
0-7645-0746-X 0-7645-1657-4 0-7645-0818-0
0-7645-1545-4 0-7645-0772-9 0-7645-0812-135 55784X BOB.qxd  3/29/04  4:20 PM  Page 364